The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tommy Wideawake, by H. H. Bashford

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Tommy Wideawake

Author: H. H. Bashford

Release Date: May 26, 2012 [EBook #39802]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOMMY WIDEAWAKE ***




Produced by Annie R. McGuire. This book was produced from
scanned images of public domain material from the Google
Print archive.









TOMMY WIDEAWAKE




TOMMY
WIDEAWAKE


BY
H. H. BASHFORD

       *       *       *       *       *

PUBLISHED BY JOHN LANE
The Bodley Head
NEW YORK AND LONDON
MCMIII




_Copyright, 1903_
By JOHN LANE




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                                           PAGE
      I--In which four men make a promise                              9
     II--In which two rats meet a sudden death                        19
    III--In which a hat floats down stream                            34
     IV--In which a young lady is left upon the bank                  46
      V--In which April is mistress                                   55
     VI--In which four men meet a train                               69
    VII--In which Madge whistles in a wood                            79
   VIII--In which two adjectives are applied to Tommy                 90
     IX--In which Tommy climbs a stile                               100
      X--In which I receive two warnings, and neglect one            114
     XI--In which Tommy is in peril                                  121
    XII--In which Tommy makes a resolve                              133
   XIII--In which the poet plucks a foxglove                         142
    XIV--In which Tommy converses with the Pale Boy                  153
     XV--In which some people meet in a wheatfield                   160
    XVI--In which Tommy crosses the ploughing                        169
   XVII--In which Tommy takes the upland road                        173
  XVIII--And last                                                    186




I

IN WHICH FOUR MEN MAKE A PROMISE


We were sitting round the fire, in the study--five men, all of us
middle-aged and sober-minded, four of us bachelors, one a widower.

And it was he who spoke, with an anxious light in his grey eyes, and two
thoughtful wrinkles at the bridge of his military nose.

"Tommy," he observed, "Tommy is not an ordinary boy."

We were silent, and I could see the doctor's lips twitching beneath his
moustache, as he gazed hard into the fire, and sucked at his cigar. The
colonel knocked the ashes out of his pipe, and resumed:

"I suppose," he said, "that it is a comparatively unusual circumstance
to find five men, unrelated by birth or marriage, who, having been
friends at school and college and having reached years of maturity,
find themselves resident in the same village, with that early
friendship not merely still existent, but, if I may say so, stronger
than ever."

We nodded.

"It is unusual," observed the vicar.

"As you know," proceeded the colonel, a little laboriously, for he was a
poor conversationalist, "the calls of my profession have forbidden me,
of late years, to enjoy as much of your company as I could have
wished--and now, after a very pleasant winter together, I must once
again take the Eastern trail for an indefinite period."

We were regretfully silent--perhaps also a little curious, for our
friend was not wont to discourse thus fully to us.

The poet appeared even a little dismayed, owing, doubtless, to that
intuition which has made him so justly renowned in his circle of
admirers, for the colonel's next remarks filled us all with a similar
emotion.

"Dear friends," he said, leaning forward in his chair, and placing his
pipe upon the whist table, "may I--would you allow me so to trespass on
this friendship of ours, as to ask for your interest in my only son,
Thomas?"

For a minute all of us, I fancy, trod the fields of memory.

The poet's thoughts hovered round a small grave in his garden, wherein
lay an erstwhile feline comrade of his solitude, whose soul had leaped
into space at the assault of an unerring pebble.

The vicar and the doctor would seem to have had similar
reminiscences--and had I not seen a youthful figure wading complacently
through my cucumber frames? We all were interested in Tommy.

Another chord was touched.

"He is motherless, you see, and very alone," the colonel pleaded, as
though our thoughts had been audible.

We remembered the brief bright years, and the long grey ones, and
steeled our hearts for service.

"I have seen so little of him, myself," continued the colonel. "He is at
school and he will go to college, but a boy needs more than school and
college can give him--he needs a hand to guide his thoughts and fancies,
and liberty, in which they may unfold. He needs developing in a way in
which no school or college can develop him. I would have him see nature,
and learn her lessons; see men and things, and know how to discern and
appreciate. I would have him a little different--wider shall I
say?--than the mere stereotyped public-school and varsity
product--admirable as it is. I would have him cultured, but not a
worshipper of culture, to the neglect of those deeper qualities without
which culture is a mere husk.

"I would have him athletic, but not of those who deify athletics.

"Above all, I would have him such a gentleman as only he can be who
realises that the privilege of good birth is in no way due to indigenous
merit."

He paused, and for a while we smoked in silence.

"He will, of course, be away at school for the greater part of each
year. But if you, dear friends, would undertake--in turn, if you
will--to supervise his holidays, I should be more than grateful. We
grown men regard our life in terms--a boy punctuates his, by
holidays--and it is in them, that I would beg of you to influence him
for good."

He turned to the poet.

"Tommy," he said, "has, I feel sure, a deeply imaginative nature, and I
am by no means certain that he is not poetical. In fact, I believe he
once wrote something about a star, which was really quite
creditable--quite creditable."

The poet looked a little bewildered.

"And I believe that Tommy has scientific bents"--the colonel looked at
the doctor, who bowed silently.

Then he regarded me a little doubtfully--after a pause.

"Tommy is not an ordinary boy," he repeated, somewhat ambiguously I
thought. Lastly, he turned to the vicar, "I could never repay the man
who taught my boy to love God," he said simply, and we fell once more to
our silence, and our smoking, while the flames leaped merrily in the old
grate, and flung strange shadows over the black wainscot and polished
floor.

Camslove Grange was old and serene and aristocratic, an antithesis, in
all respects, to its future owner, whose round head pressed a pillow
upstairs, while his spirit wandered, at play, through a boy's dreamland.
The colonel waved his hand.

"It will all be his, you see, one day," he said, almost apologetically,
"and I want the old place to have a good master."

I have said that the colonel's request had filled us with dismay, and
this indeed was very much the case.

We all had our habits. We all--even the doctor, who was the youngest of
us by some years--loved peace and regularity. Moreover, we all, if not
possessed of an actual dislike for boys, nevertheless preferred them at
a considerable distance.

And yet, in spite of all these things, we could not but fall in with the
colonel's appeal, both for the sake of unbroken friendship--and in one
case, at least (he will not mind, if I confess it), for the sake of a
sweet lost face.

And so it came about that we clasped hands, in the silence of the old
study, where, if rumour be true, more than one famous treaty has been
made and signed, and took upon our shoulders the burden of Thomas, only
son of our departing friend.

The colonel rose to his feet, and there was a glad light in his eyes. He
held out both hands towards us.

"God bless you, old comrades," he said. Then, in answer to a question,

"Tommy returns to school, to-morrow, for the Easter term, and his
holiday will be in April, I fancy. To whom is he to go first?"

We all looked at each other with questioning eyes--then we looked at the
fire.

The silence began to get awkward.

"Shall we--er--shall we toss--draw lots, that is?" suggested the vicar,
rather nervously.

The idea seemed good, and we resorted to the time-honoured, yet most
unsatisfactory, expedient of spinning a penny in the air.

The results, combined with a process of exclusion, left the choice
between the poet and the doctor.

The vicar spun, and the poet called. "Heads!" he cried, feverishly.

And heads it was.

A smile of relief and triumph was dawning on the doctor's face, when the
poet looked at him, anxiously.

"Is there not--" he asked. "Is there not a method of procedure, by which
one may call thrice?"

"Threes," remarked the vicar, genially.

"Of course there is--would you like me to toss again?"

"I--I think I would," said the poet, meekly. Then turning,
apologetically, to the colonel,

"It's better to make _quite_ sure, don't you think?"

The doctor looked a little crestfallen, but agreed, and the vicar once
more sent the coin into the air.

"Tails," cried the poet, and as the coin fell, the sovereign's head lay
upward.

The poet drew a deep breath.

"It would seem," he said, bowing to the doctor, "that Tommy may yet
become your guest."

"There is another go," said the doctor, and the vicar tossed a third
time.

"Heads," cried the poet, and heads it proved to be.

The poet wiped his forehead, after which the colonel grasped his hand.

"Write and tell me how he gets on," he said. "I cannot tell you how
grateful I am to you--to all of you."

"No, of course not--that is, it's nothing you know--only too delighted
to have the dear boy," stammered the poet. "Er--does he--can he undress
himself and--and all that, you know?"

The colonel laughed.

"Why, he's thirteen," he cried.

A little later we took our departure.

In a shadowy part of the drive the poet pulled my sleeve.

"Can boys of that age undress themselves and brush their own teeth, do
you suppose?" he asked.

"I believe so," I answered.

The poet shook his head sorrowfully.

"I don't know what Mrs. Chundle will say," he remarked.

And at the end of the drive we parted, with averted looks and scarce
concealed distress, each taking a contemplative path to the hitherto
calm of his bachelor shrine.




II

IN WHICH TWO RATS MEET A SUDDEN DEATH


"The country is just now at its freshest," said the poet, waving his
hand towards the open window and the green lawn. "The world is waking
again to its--er, spring holiday, Tommy, and you must be out in the air
and the open fields, and share it while you may."

The poet beamed, a little apprehensively it is true, across the
breakfast table at Tommy, who was mastering a large plate of eggs and
bacon with courage and facility.

"It's jolly good of you to have me, you know," observed Tommy, pausing a
moment to regard his host.

"On the contrary, it is my very glad privilege. I have often felt that
my youth has been left behind a little oversoon--I am getting, I fancy,
a trifle stiff and narrowed. You must lead me, Tommy, into the world of
action and sport--we will play games together--hide and go seek. You
must buy me a hoop, and we will play marbles and cricket--" and the
poet smiled complacently over his spectacles.

Tommy wriggled a little uneasily in his chair, and looked out of the
window.

The trees were bending to the morning wind, which sang through the
budding branches and hovered over the garden daffodils. Away beyond the
lawn and the meadows the hills rose clear and bracing to the eye, and
through a chain of willows sped the wavering blue gleam of sunny waters.

"I--I'm an awful duffer at games," said Tommy, with a blush on his brown
cheeks, and horrid visions of the poet and himself bowling hoops.

The poet drew a deep breath of relief.

"You love nature, dear boy--the sights and sounds and mysteries of the
hedgerow and the stream--is it not so?"

"Yes," said Tommy, dubiously. "I--I'm rather a hot shot with a
catapult."

The poet gazed out across the garden. A small green mound beneath the
chestnut tree marked the grave of the fond Delicia--a tribute to Tommy's
skill.

Involuntarily, the poet sighed.

Tommy looked up from the marmalade.

"You don't mind, do you?" he asked anxiously.

"No, no, of course not, dear boy," said the poet with an effort. "That
is--you--you won't hit anything, will you?"

"Rather," cried Tommy. "You jolly well see if I don't."

Delicia's successor looked up from her saucer on the rug, and the
"Morning Post" slipped from the poet's nerveless grasp.

"You--oh Tommy, you will spare the tabby," he gasped tragically,
indicating the rug and its occupant.

Tommy grinned.

"All right," he said,--adding as a comforting afterthought, "And cats
are awful poor sport, you know--they're so jolly slow."

But the poet was far away.

With every meal Mrs. Chundle brought a pencil and paper, for as likely
as not inspiration would not scorn to come with coffee or hover over a
rasher of bacon. And it was even so, at this present.

Tommy watched the process with some curiosity. Then he stole to the
window, for all the world was calling him.

But he paused with one foot on the first step, as the poet looked up
from his manuscript.

"How do you like this?" he asked eagerly:

  Oh the daffodils sing of my lady's gown,
    The hyacinths dream of her eyes,
  And the wandering breezes across the down,
    The harmonies dropt from the skies,
  Are full of the song of the love that swept
    My citadel by surprise.

  Oh the woods they are bright with my lady's voice,
    The paths they are sweet with her tread,
  And the kiss of her gown makes the lawn rejoice,
    The violet lift her head.
  Yet, lady, I know not if I must smile
    Or weep for the days long sped.

The poet blinked rapturously through his glasses at Tommy, listening
respectfully, by the window.

"They're jolly good--but I say, who is she?"

The poet seemed a little puzzled.

"I am afraid I do not comprehend you," he said.

"The lady," observed Tommy. "I didn't know you were in love, you know,
or anything of that sort."

The poet rose to his feet, with some dignity.

"I am not in love, Thomas," he said. "I--I never even think about such
things." Tommy turned back.

"I say, if you're going to the post-office with that will you buy me
some elastic--for my catty, you know?" he said.

Just then the housekeeper entered, and Tommy went out upon the lawn.

"Please, sir, there's a friend o' Mister Thomas's a settin' in the
kitchen, an' 'e's bin there a hower, pretty nigh--an' 'is talk--it
fairly makes me blood rise, and me pore stomach that sour--an', please,
'e wants ter know if Mister Thomas is ready to go after them rats 'e was
talkin' of, an' if the Cholmondeleys, which is me blood relations, 'ad
'eard 'im--Lord."

Mrs. Chundle wiped her brow at this appalling supposition, and the poet
gazed helplessly at her.

"Did you say a friend of Mr. Thomas's?" he asked.

"Yes, sir, an' that common 'e--'e's almost took the shine off of the
plates."

"Dear, dear! how very--very peculiar, Mrs. Chundle."

A genial, red countenance appeared at the doorway.

"Beg pawdon, sir, but the young gemman 'e wanted me to show 'im a nest
or two o' rats down Becklington stream, sir--rare fat uns they be, sir,
too."

"I--I do not approve of sport--of slaying innocent beings--even if they
be but rodents; I must ask you to leave me."

The poet waved his hand.

The rubicund sportsman looked disappointed. "Beg pawdon, sir, I'm sure.
Thought 's 'ow it were all right, sir."

"I do not blame you, my good man. I merely protest against the ruling
spirit of destruction which our country worships so deplorably. You may
go."

And all this while Tommy stood bare-headed on the lawn, filling his
lungs with the morning's sweetness, and feeling the grip of its appeal
in his heart and blood and limbs. A sturdy little figure he was, clad in
a short jacket and attenuated flannel knickerbockers which left his
brown knees bare above his stockings.

The blood in his round cheeks shone red beneath the tan, and there were
some freckles at the bridge of his nose. In his hand was a battered
wide-awake hat--his usual headgear--and the origin of his sobriquet--for
he will, I imagine, be known as Tommy Wideawake until the crack of doom,
and, maybe, even after that.

With all his appreciation of the day, however, no word of the
conversation just recorded missed his ears, and I regret to say that
when the red-cheeked intruder turned a moment at the garden gate,
Tommy's right eyelashes trembled a moment upon his cheek while his lips
parted over some white teeth for the smallest fraction of a second.

Then he kicked viciously at a daisy and blinked up at the friendly sun.

The poet stepped out on the lawn beside him with a worried wrinkle on
his forehead.

"I feel rather upset," he said.

"Let's go for a walk," suggested Tommy.

The poet considered a moment.

An epic, which lagged somewhat, held out spectral arms to him from the
recesses of his writing-desk, but the birds' spring songs were too
winsome for prolonged resistance, and to their wooing the poet
capitulated.

"Let us come," he said, and they stepped through the wicker gate into
the water-meadows.

The Becklington brook is only a thin thread here, but lower down it
receives tributaries from two adjoining valleys and becomes a stream of
some importance, turning, indeed, a couple of mills, before it reaches
the Arrowley, which enters the Isis.

The day was hot--one of those early heralds of June so often encountered
in late April, and the meadows basked dreamily in the sun, while from
the hills came a dull glow of budding gorse.

The poet was full of fancies, and as the house grew farther behind them,
and the path led ever more deeply among copse and field, his natural
calm soon reasserted itself. From time to time he would jot down a happy
phrase or quaint expression, enlarging thereon to Tommy, who listened
patiently enough.

Plop.

A lazy ripple cut the surface of the stream, and another, and another.

Tommy lifted a warning hand and held his breath.

Yes, sure enough, there was a brown nose stemming the water.

In an instant Tommy was crouching in the reeds, his hand feeling in his
pocket, and his small body quivering.

The poet's mouth was open.

Followed a twang, and the whistle of a small projectile, and the rat
disappeared. But the stone had not hit him.

"Tommy!" protested the poet.

But his appeal fell on deaf ears, for Tommy was watching the far side of
the stream with an anxious gaze. Suddenly the brown nose reappeared.

He was a very ugly rat.

"Tommy!" said the poet again, weakly.

The rat was making for a bit of crumbled bank opposite, and Tommy stood
up for better aim. The poet held his breath.

One foot more and the prey would be lost, but Tommy stood like a young
statue--then whang; and slowly the rat turned over on his back and
vanished from sight, to float presently--a swollen corpse--down the
quiet stream.

"Well hit, sir," cried the poet.

Tommy turned with dancing eyes.

"Jolly nearly lost him," he said. "You should just see young Collins
with a catty. He's miles better than me."

But the poet had remembered himself.

"Tommy," he said, huskily, "I--I don't approve of sport of this kind.
Cannot you aim at--at inanimate objects?"

"It's a jolly poor game," said Tommy--then holding out the wooden fork,
with its pendant elastic.

"Have a try," he said.

The poet accepted a handful of ammunition.

"I must amuse the boy and enter into his sports as far as I may if I
would influence his character," he said to himself.

Tommy stuck a clod of earth on a stick some few yards away, at which,
for some time, the poet shot wildly enough.

Yet, with each successive attempt, the desire for success grew stronger
within him, and when at last the clod flew into a thousand crumbs, he
flushed with triumph, and had to wipe the dimness from his glasses.

Oh, poets! it is dangerous to play with fire.

Plop.

And another lusty rat held bravely out into the stream.

"Oh, get him, get him!" cried Tommy, jumping up and down. "Lend me the
catty. Let me have a shot. Do buck up."

But the poet waved him aside.

"There shall be no--" he hesitated.

This rat was surely uglier than the last.

"No unseemly haste," concluded the poet.

Did the rat scent danger? I know not, but, on a sudden, he turned back
to shelter. And, alas, this was too much for even Principle and
Conscience--and whang went the catapult, and lo, even as by a miracle
(which, indeed, it surely was), the bullet found its mark.

And I regret to say that the vicar, leaning unnoticed on a neighbouring
gate, heard the poet exclaim, with some exultation: "Got him."

"Oh, _well_ hit!" cried Tommy. "By Jove, that was a ripping shot."

The poet blushed at the praise--but alas for human pleasures, and
notably stolen ones, for they are fleeting.

"Hullo," said a sonorous voice.

They both turned, and the vicar smiled.

The poet was hatless and flushed. From one hand dangled a catapult; in
the other he clutched some convenient pebbles.

"Really," said the vicar, "I should never have thought it."

The poet sighed, and handed the weapon to Tommy.

"Run away now, old chap," he said, "and have a good time. I think I
shall go home."

Tommy trotted off into the wood, and the vicar and the poet held back
towards the village.

"How goes the experiment?" asked the former, magnanimously ignoring the
scene he had just witnessed.

The poet shook his head.

"It is hard to say yet," he replied. "I have not seen any _marked_
development of the poetical and imaginative side of him--and he brings
some very queer friends to my house. But he's a good boy, on the whole,
and the holidays have only just begun."

In the village street they paused.

"I--I want to go to the post-office," said the poet.

"All right," said the vicar.

"Don't--please don't wait for me," said the poet.

"It's a pleasure," replied the vicar. "The day is fine and young, and it
is also Monday. I am not busy."

"I really wish you wouldn't."

The vicar was a man of tact, and had known the poet since boyhood, so he
bowed.

"Good day," he said, and strolled towards the parsonage.

The poet looked up and down the long, lazy street. There was no one in
sight. Then he plunged into the little shop.

"Some elastic, please," he said, nervously. "Thick and square--for a
catapult."




III

IN WHICH A HAT FLOATS DOWN STREAM


"And so my boy has taken up his abode with our friend, the poet," wrote
the colonel to me. "Do you know, I fancy it will be good for both of
them. I have long felt that our poet was getting too solitary and
remote--too self-centred, shall I say?

"And yet I have, too, some misgivings as to his power of controlling
Tommy--although my faith in Mrs. Chundle is profound.

"Tommy, as you know, is not perhaps quite so strong as he might be, and
needs careful watching--changing clothes and so on. You recollect his
sudden and quite severe illness just after the Chantrey's garden party
last year."

I laid down the letter and smiled, for I had wondered at the time at
Tommy's survival, so appalling had been his powers of absorption.

"Poor colonel," I reflected. "He is too ridiculously wrapped up in the
young rascal, for anything."

The letter ran on:

"Spare no expense as to his keep and the supplying of his reasonable
wishes, but do not let him know, at any rate for the present, that he is
heir to Camslove--I think he does not realise it yet--and for a while it
is better he should not.

"My greeting to all the brothers. There are wars and rumours of wars in
the air of the Northwest...."

I restored the letter to my pocket, and lay back in the grass, beneath
the branches.

Wars and rumours of wars--well, they were far enough from here, as every
twittering birdling manifested.

The colonel had always been the man of action among us, though he, of us
all, had the wherewithal to be the most at ease.

One of those strange incongruities with which life abounds, and which, I
reflected, must be accepted with resignation.

I had always rather prided myself upon the completeness with which I
had resigned myself to my lot of idleness and obscurity, and to my own
mind was a philosopher of no small merit.

I lay back under the trees full of the content of the day and the green
woods and abandoned myself to meditation.

Whether it was the spirit of Spring or some latent essence of activity
in my being, I do not know, but certain it is that a wave of discontent
spread over me--a weariness (very unfamiliar) of myself and my cheap
philosophy.

I sat up, wondering at the change and its suddenness, groping in my mind
for a solution to the problem.

Could it be that my rule of life was based on a fallacy?

Surely not. Suddenly I thought of Tommy and took a deep breath of the
sweet woodland air, for I had found what I had wanted.

Resignation--it was a sacrilege to use the word on such a day.

Yes, I thought, there is no doubt that the instinctive philosophy of
boyhood is the true rule of life, as indeed one ought to have suspected
long ago.

To enjoy the present with all the capacity of every sense, to regard the
past with comparative indifference, since it is irrevocable, and the
future with a healthy abandonment, since it is unknown, and to leave the
sorrows of introspection to those who know no better--avaunt with your
resignation. And even as I said it I saw the reeds by the pool quiver
and a pair of brown eyes twinkle joyously at me from their midst.

"Hello, Tommy!" I cried.

He emerged, clad only in an inconspicuous triangular garment about his
waist.

"I've been watching you ever so long," he said triumphantly.

"Been bathing?" I asked.

"Rather. It's jolly fine and not a bit cold. I say, you should have seen
the old boy potting rats."

"The poet?" I murmured in amaze.

Tommy nodded.

"He is getting quite a good shot," he said. "He was doing awful well
till the vicar saw him about an hour ago--an' then he wouldn't go on any
more."

"I should think not," said I. "The humanitarian, the naturalist, the
anti-vivisectionist, the anti-destructionist--it passes comprehension."

Tommy took a header and came up on to the sunny bank beside me, where he
stood a moment with glowing cheeks and lithe shining limbs.

"This is ripping," he said--every letter an italic. "This is just
ab-solutely ripping."

I laughed at his enthusiasm, and, as I laughed, shared it--oh the wine
of it, of youth and health and spring--was I talking about resignation
just now?--surely not.

Tommy squatted down beside me on his bare haunches, with his hands
clasped over his knees.

"I have heard from your father to-day," I said.

Tommy grunted, and threw a stick at an early butterfly.

He was always most uncommunicative where he felt most, so I waited with
discretion.

"All right?" he queried, presently, in a nonchalant voice.

I nodded.

"He says he's afraid you're not very strong."

Tommy stared, then he looked a little frightened.

"I--of course I'm not _very_ strong, you know," he said thoughtfully,
casting a glance down his sturdy young arms. "But I can lick young
Collins, an' he weighs seven pounds more than me, an' I can pull up on
the bar at gym--"

I hastened to reassure him.

"He referred to your attack last summer, you know, after the Chantrey
affair."

Tommy grinned expansively.

"I expect the pater didn't know what it was," he said.

"But I did."

"You--you never told him?" in an anxious voice.

"No."

Tommy sighed.

"The pater does hate a chap being greedy, you see, and--those strawbobs
were so awfully good. I couldn't help it--an' father thought I'd got
a--intestinal chill, I think he said."

Tommy gave a passing moment to remembrance. Then he jumped up.

"I'm quite dry again," he said, looking down at me. "So I guess I'll hop
in."

The remark appeared to me slightly inconsequent, but Tommy laughed and
drew back under the shade of the tree. Then came a rush of white limbs,
and he was bobbing up again in the middle of the sunny pool.

"Well dived," I cried, encouragingly, but he looked a little
contemptuous.

"It was a jolly bad one," he said, "a beastly...." Delicacy forbids me
to record the exact word he used, but it ended with "flopper."

He crawled out again, and shook the water from his eyes.

"I say, won't you come in?" he cried eagerly. "It's simply grand in
there, and a gravel bottom."

But I am a man of careful habits, and sober ways, with a reputation for
some stateliness both of behaviour and bearing, and I shook my head.

Tommy urged again.

"It's not as if you were an old man," he cried.

The thought had not occurred to me. Age, in our little fraternity had
been a matter of but small interest. We had pursued the same routine of
gentle exercise, and dignified diversion, quiet jest and cultured
occupation, for so many years now, that we had seemed to be alike
removed from youth and age, in a quiet, unalterable, back-water of life,
quite apart from the hurrying stream of contemporary event.

No, I was certainly not an old man, unless a well preserved specimen of
forty-eight, with simple habits, can so be styled.

Tommy stood expectant before me, his bare feet well apart, a very
embodiment of young health, and, as I looked at him, a horrid doubt
crept into my mind--had I--could I possibly have become that most
objectionable of persons, a man in a groove?

"Do come," said Tommy.

"Don't be a fool," said Wisdom (only I was not quite sure of the
speaker).

I looked round at the meadow, and the wood, and saw that we were alone.

"It is April," I said weakly.

"But it's quite warm--it is really." And so I fell.

To you, O reader, it may seem a quite small matter, but to me it was far
from being so, for as I climbed the bank from each glad plunge I felt in
my blood a strange desire growing to do something, to achieve, to
surmount.

Such emotions I had not known for years--not since--a time, when, on a
day, I had set myself to love seclusion and inactivity, and to live in
study and retrospect, on the small means that were mine.

Ah, Tommy, never think that if any one desire be unfulfilled, life has
therefore lost its sweetness, and its mission, and its responsibility!

"Cave," hissed Tommy, from the water.

I held my breath, and sure enough there were voices along the path, and
close at hand, too.

I made a desperate leap, and entered the water with a quite colossal
flop, for I am moderately stout.

And, even so, I had barely time to wade in up to my neck, before two
figures, those of a little girl and a young lady, tripped into sight.

"Why," said the little girl, "there's old Mr. Mathews and a little boy
in the pool. How funny."

The young lady--it was Lady Chantrey's governess--hesitated a moment and
then courageously held on.

"Yes," I heard her say. "It certainly is peculiar, quite peculiar."

Whether she referred to me, or the situation, or an affair of previous
conversation, I did not know.

I did not, indeed, much care, for surely this was enough that I, a
philosopher of dignity, a bachelor of some importance, at any rate in
Camslove, should have been seen in a small pool, with only a draggled
head above the surface, by Lady Chantrey's daughter, and her governess.

I crept out, and had perforce to sit in the sun to dry, praying
earnestly lest any other members of the surrounding families should come
that way.

Tommy was in high spirits.

"It's done you lots of good," he said.

I glared at him.

"What do you mean?" I asked coldly, for his words seemed suggestive.

"You look so jolly fresh," he observed, dressing himself leisurely.

I felt that it was time I returned, and invited Tommy to partake of
lunch with me. He declined, however, as he had thoughtfully provided
himself with food, before starting out with the poet.

"So long," he said.

As I glanced up the brook, before returning homewards, I saw a sailor
hat, navigating a small rapid.

"But I have no walking-stick," I reflected. "And it is in the middle of
the stream."




IV

IN WHICH A YOUNG LADY IS LEFT UPON THE BANK


The sailor hat bobbed, merrily, down the stream, scorning each friendly
brown boulder that would have stopped it, and dodging every drooping
bough that would have held it back. For was not its legend of H. M. S.
Daring, and must not the honour of Britain's navy be manfully
maintained?

Tommy sat peacefully just above the bathing pool, munching his
sandwiches, and letting the clear water trickle across his toes, very
much contented with himself, and, consequently, with his environment
also.

"Oh please--my hat," said a pathetic voice.

Tommy turned round, and on the path behind him stood the little girl,
who had passed, a short while before.

She was quite breathless, and her hair was very tangled, as it crept
about her cheeks, and hung over her brow.

Her hands were clasped, and she looked at Tommy, appealingly.

Tommy surveyed the hat, which had swung into the pool.

"It's too deep, just there, for me to go in, with my clothes on," he
said.

"But there's a shallow part a little way down, and I'll go for it there.
Come on."

He jumped up, and crammed his stockings and shoes into his pockets, as
they ran down the path, beside the brook.

"How did you lose it?" he asked.

"I was climbing a tree--and--and the wind blowed it off."

"Oh!"

"My governess is reading a book, about half a mile up the stream, where
the poplars are."

"Oh!"

Tommy felt strangely tongue-tied--a new and wholly perplexing
experience. He was relieved when they arrived at the shallows, and waded
carefully into the stream.

As the hat sailed down, he dexterously caught it, and came back in
triumph.

"Oh, thank you so much. I hope you aren't very wet."

Tommy examined the upturned edge of his knickerbockers, and then looked
into a pair of wide black eyes.

"Not a bit, hardly," he said, and he thought her cheeks were redder than
any he had seen. He did not, as a rule, approve of girls, but he felt
that there was a kindred spirit twinkling behind those black eyes.

"I think I must go back," said she.

"Wh--what is your name?" stammered Tommy, with a curious desire to
prolong the time.

She laughed.

"I think you might tell me yours."

"I got your hat for you."

"You liked getting it."

"You'd have lost it, if I hadn't gone in."

"No, I shouldn't. I could have got it myself. I'm not afraid."

Tommy capitulated.

"They call me Tommy Wideawake," he said.

"What a funny name. I thought you looked rather sleepy, when I saw you
on the bank just now."

"You looked jolly untidy," retorted Tommy irrelevantly.

"Are you the browny whitey colonel's son?"

Tommy spoke with aroused dignity.

"You must not call my father names," he said.

"I'm not. I think he's a splendid brave man, and I always call him that,
because his face is so brown and his moustache and hair so very white."

Tommy blushed. Then he said very slowly, and with some hesitation, for
to no one before had he confided so much:

"I think he is the bravest--the bravest officer in the whole army."

Then his eyes fell, and he looked confusedly at his toes.

The stream was rippling softly over the shallows, full of its young
dream.

Then--

"I'm Madge Chantrey," said a shy voice.

Tommy looked up eagerly.

"Why, then I must have seen you in church--but you looked so different
you know, so jolly--jolly different."

Madge laughed.

"I've often seen you, in an eton jacket, with a very big collar, and you
always went to sleep in the sermon, and forgot to get up when the vicar
said 'And now.'"

Tommy grinned.

Then an inspiration seized him.

"I say; let's go on to the mill, an' we'll pot water-rats on the way,
an' get some tea there. He's an awful good sort, is the miller. His
name's Berrill, and he's ridden to London and back in a day, and it's a
hundred and fifty miles, and he can carry two bags of wheat at once, and
there's sure to be some rats up at Becklington End, and it's only about
three o'clock--and it's such an absolutely ripping day."

He stopped and pulled up some grass.

"You might as well," he concluded, in a voice which implied that her
choice was of no consequence to him.

Her black eyes danced, and she swung her hat thoughtfully round her
finger.

"It would be rather nice," she said. "But there is Miss Gerald, you
know; she will wonder where I am."

"Never mind. I'll bring you home."

And down the chain of water-meadows from one valley to another they
wandered through the April afternoon, till the old mill-pool lay before
them deep and shadowy beneath the green, wet walls. A long gleam of
light lay athwart its surface, dying slowly as the sunset faded.

"It is tea-time," said Tommy.

"Poor Miss Gerald," murmured Madge.

"She's all right," replied Tommy, cheerfully. "I expect she's jolly well
enjoying herself."

       *       *       *       *       *

As I passed the poet's gate I saw him pacing the lawn, and hailed him.

"Have you enjoyed the morning?" I asked.

He looked at me a little suspiciously.

"You haven't seen the vicar?" he queried.

I shook my head.

"Yes," he observed. "Thomas and I have been bathed, I may say, in
nature."

He waved his hand.

"I saw Tommy bathing," said I.

Again the poet looked at me sharply.

"Did you--did you have any converse with the boy?" he asked.

"Only a little. He seemed to be thoroughly happy."

The poet smiled.

"Ah! the message of Spring is hope, and happiness, and life," he said,
"and Tommy is even now in Spring."

I bowed.

"I saw a dead rat floating down stream," I remarked, casually.

The poet gave me a dark glance, but my expression was innocent and
frank.

"_In media vitae, sumus in morte_," he observed, sententiously, and
walked back to the lawn.

As I turned away, I met the doctor hurrying home.

He greeted me pleasantly, but there was curiosity in his eyes.

"What's the matter?" I asked, genially, for I felt I had scored one
against the poet.

"Whatever has happened to your hair? It looks very clammy and
streaky--and it's hanging over your ears."

I crammed my hat on a little tighter.

"Nothing at all," I said, hurriedly. "It's--it's rather warm work, you
know, walking in this weather."

But I could see he didn't believe me.

"Seen Tommy?" he asked.

"Yes."

"Been fooling up the stream, I suppose?"

I coloured.

"No, of course not--er, that is, yes----Tommy has."

The doctor smiled.

"Good day, Mathews," he said.

And we parted.

Miss Gerald sat reading, on the bank.




V

IN WHICH APRIL IS MISTRESS


  I have heard the song that the Spring-time sings
    In my journey over the hills,
  The wild _reveille_ of life, that rings
    To the broad sky over the hills:
  For the banners of Spring to the winds are spread,
    Her hosts on the plain overrun,
  And the front is led, where the earth gleams red,
    And the furze-bush flares to the sun.

  I have seen the challenge of Spring-time flung
    To the wide world over the hills;
  I have marched its resolute ranks among,
    In my journey over the hills.
  The strong young grass has carried the crest,
    And taken the vale by surprise,
  As it leapt from rest on the Winter's breast
    To its conquest under the skies.

  I have heard the secret of Spring-time told
    In a whisper over the hills,
  That life and love shall arise and hold
    Dominion over the hills
  Till the Summer, at length, shall awake from sleep,
    Warm-cheeked, on the wings of the day,
  Where the still streams creep, and the lanes lie deep,
    And the green boughs shadow the way.

"Four o'clock!" sang the church bells down the valley, as the poet
stooped to cull an early blue-bell.

"Daring little blossom--why, your comrades are still sleeping," he said.

The blue-bell was silent, but all the tiny green leaves laughed, blowing
cheekily in the sun.

"Poor, silly poet," they seemed to say, "why not wake up, like the
blue-bell, from your land of dreams, and drink the real nectar--live for
a day or two in a real, wild, glorious Spring?"

But the poet dreamed on, stringing his conceits heavily together, and
with a knitted brow; for, somehow, the feet of the muse lagged tardily
this April afternoon.

Then he stumbled over a parasol which lay across the path.

He looked up.

"I beg your pardon," he said, looking into a pair of blue eyes--or were
they grey, or hazel? He was not quite sure, but they seemed, at any
rate, Hibernian.

"It was quite my fault; I am so sorry."

"Nay, I was dreaming," said the poet.

"And, sure, so was I, too."

"I have not hurt it, I trust."

"Not at all, but it must be quite late."

"It is four o'clock."

"Good gracious, where can the child have got to?"

"You have lost some one?"

"My pupil."

The poet bowed.

"A sorrow that befalls all leaders of disciples," he observed.

Miss Gerald stared, and the poet continued, "The young will only learn
when they have fledged their wings and found them weak."

"And then?"

"They come to us older ones for a remedy. Knowledge is associated,
madam, with broken wings."

"But I cannot take philosophy home to her mother--she will most
certainly require Madge--and can you tell me where this path leads?"

The poet waved his hand.

"Up-stream to the village--down-stream to the mill," he said.

Miss Gerald thought a moment.

"She will have gone down stream," she exclaimed.

The poet meditated.

"I, too, have lost a boy," he said.

Miss Gerald looked surprised.

"The son of a friend," explained the poet.

"I must look for Madge at once," cried Miss Gerald, gathering up her
books.

"May we search together--you know the proverb about the heads?"

She laughed.

"If you like," she said, and they followed the stream together.

"You are the poet, are you not?" asked Miss Gerald presently.

"A mere amateur."

"Lady Chantrey has a copy of your works. I have read some of them."

"I trust they gave you pleasure--at any rate amusement."

"A little of both," said Miss Gerald.

"You are very frank."

"Some of them puzzled me a little--and--and I think you belie your
writings."

"For instance?"

"You sing of action, and Spring, and achievement--and love. But you live
in dreams, and books, and solitude."

"I believe what I write, nevertheless."

Miss Gerald was silent, and in a minute the poet spoke again.

"You think my writings lack the ring of conviction?" he asked.

She laughed.

"They would be stronger if they bore the ring of experience," she said.
"_Experientia docet_, you know, and the poets are supposed to teach us
ordinary beings."

"I don't pretend to teach."

"Then you ought to. Is it not the duty of 'us older ones,' as you said
just now?--The old leaves living over again in the new, you know," and
she smiled. "That's quite poetical, isn't it, even if it is a bit of a
platitude?"

"And be laughed at for our pains, even as those hopeful young debutantes
are laughing at the dowdy old leaves, on that dead tree yonder."

"I knew you were no true singer of Spring."

       *       *       *       *       *

Two children wandered back along the path.

"I say, you're not a bad sort," said Tommy.

Madge laughed.

"Hullo, Tommy," cried the poet.

"My dear Madge, where _have_ you been?" cried Miss Gerald.

The poet smiled.

"It is April, Miss Gerald," he said. "We must not be too severe on the
young people. As you know, this is proverbially an irresponsible,
changeable, witch of a month."

"We must hurry home, Madge," said Miss Gerald, holding out a graceful,
though strong, hand to the poet.

He clasped it a moment.

"That was an interesting chat we had, Miss Gerald. I shall remember it.
Come, Tommy, it is time that we also returned."

They walked slowly home together, Tommy chattering away freely of the
day's adventures. The poet seemed more than usually abstracted. In a
pause of Tommy's babbling, the name on the fly leaf of a book came back
to him. He had seen it, in the sunshine, by the stream.

"Mollie Gerald," he murmured.

"I beg your pardon," said Tommy, politely.

"Nothing," snapped the poet.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Which I says to Berrill, 'Berrill,' I says, 'Jest look 'ee 'ere now, if
the pote ain't a-walkin' along o' Miss Gerald from the 'all, as close
an' hinterested as never was, an' 'im, fer all the world, a
'missusogynist,' I says, meanin' a wimming-'ater.

"An' Berrill 'e said 'imself as 'e'd 'ardly a believed it if 'e 'adn't
seed it wi' 'is own heyes, so to speak.

"'It do be a masterpiece,' 'e said, 'a reg'lar masterpiece it be.'"

They were sitting in Mrs. Chundle's kitchen, and Mrs. Berrill seemed
excited.

Mrs. Chundle wiped a moist forehead with her apron, and shook her head.

"What with Mister Thomas, an' catapults--I could believe hanythink, Mrs.
Berrill," she said.

"The pote's changin' 'is ways, Mrs. Chundle."

"'E is that, Mrs. Berrill, which as me haunt Jane Chundle, as is related
to me blood-relations, the Cholmondeleys, 'eard Mrs. Cholmondeley o'
Barnardley say to the rector's wife, an' arterwards told me private,
'Yer never do know oo's oo nowadays'--be they poits or hanybody else."

"It bees just what the parson wer a sayin' a fortnight Sunday, wars an'
rumours o' wars, an' bloody moons, an' disasters an' catapults, in the
last days, 'e says--they be hall signs o' the times, Mrs. Chundle."

Mrs. Chundle sipped her tea, and looked round her immaculate kitchen.
Then she lowered her voice,

"I'm 'opin', Mrs. Berrill, I'm 'opin' hearnest as 'ow when Mister Thomas
goes back, the master will come to 'imself, like the prodigale."

Mrs. Berrill looked doubtful.

"When once the worm hentereth Eden, Mrs. Chundle," she began,
enigmatically--and they both shook their heads.

"The worm bein' Mister Thomas," remarked Mrs. Chundle. "An' 'im that
vilent an' himpetuous I never does know what 'e's agoin' hafter next."

"You should be firm, Mrs. Chundle."

"Which I ham, Mrs. Berrill, by nature hand intention, an' if I 'ad me
own way I'd spank 'im 'earty twice a week, Mrs. Berrill, Wednesdays an'
Saturdays."

"Why Wednesdays an' Saturdays, Mrs. Chundle?"

"Wednesdays ter teach 'im the hemptiness o' riches, Mrs. Berrill, which
'e gets 'is pocket-money on Wednesdays--an' Saturdays to give 'im a
chastened spirit fer the Sabbath--an' ter keep 'im from a sittin' sleepy
in church, Mrs. Berrill."

Here the door opened suddenly and Tommy came in, very muddy, with a
peaceful face, and a large rent in his coat.

"I say, Mrs. Chundle, do sew this up for me--hullo, Mrs. Berrill, that
was a ripping tea you gave us last week--you are an absolute gem, Mrs.
Chundle," and Tommy sat himself down on the kitchen bench, while Mrs.
Chundle ruefully examined the coat.

In Mrs. Berrill's eye was a challenge, as who should say, "Now, Mrs.
Chundle, arise and assert your authority, put down a firm foot and say,
this shall not be.'"

That lady doubtless saw it, for she pursed her lips and gazed at Tommy
with some dignity.

"Mister Thomas," she began--but Tommy interrupted her.

"I say, I didn't know you an' Mrs. Berrill were pals. Mrs. Berrill gave
me a huge tea the other day, Mrs. Chundle--awful good cake she makes,
don't you, Mrs. Berrill? An', I say, Mrs. Berrill, has old--has Mrs.
Chundle told you all about the Cholmondeleys, an' how they married, an'
came to England--how long ago was it?" Mrs. Chundle blushed modestly.

"With William the Norming," she said gently.

"An' how she was derived from them, you know, an' all that?"

Mrs. Berrill nodded.

"We hall know as 'ow Mrs. Chundle is a--a very superior person," she
said.

Mrs. Chundle stitched away in silent graciousness.

"Tommy," cried a distant voice--it was the poet's--"Tommy, come here,
I've just hit the bottle three times running."

Tommy grinned.

"I must go," he said. "I'm jolly glad you and Mrs. Berrill are pals,"
and he disappeared in the direction of the poet.

"Which I 'ope 'e won't turn out no worse than 'is dear father. God bless
'im," said Mrs. Berrill, as they discussed the tattered jacket.

And so the days tripped by, sunny and showery--true April days. Up in
the downs was a new shrill bleating of lambs, and down in the valley
rose the young wheat, green and strong and hopeful.

The water-meadows grew each day more velvety and luscious, as the young
grass thickened, and between the stems, in the copse, came a shimmer of
blue and gold, of blue-bell and primrose.

The stream sang buoyantly down to the mill, and Tommy wandered over the
country-side, happy in it all--and indeed almost part of it.

Moreover, Madge and her governess would often come upon him, all
unexpectedly, too, in some byway of their daily travel, and he would
show them flowers and bird's-nests, and explain for their benefit the
position of each farmhand and labourer in the commonwealth of Camslove,
and thus the days went by so happily that they seemed to have vanished
almost as they came, and on a morning Tommy woke up to the fact that the
holidays had ended. A grim showery day it was, too--a day of driving
wind and cold rain--and Tommy loitered dismally from arbour to house,
and house to arbour.

The poet was busy on a new work, and Mrs. Chundle, too intent on marking
and packing his clothes to be good company.

Madge would be indoors, as it was raining, and it was too cold and
uninviting for a bathe.

He spent the afternoon trudging about the muddy lanes with the doctor,
but the evening found him desolate.

Ah, these sad days that form our characters, as men tell us--characters
that, at times, we feel we could willingly dispense with, so that the
days might be always sunny, and the horizons clear.

Even the longest of dreary days ends at last, however, and Tommy fell
sorrowfully asleep in the summer house, a rain-drop rolling dismally
down his freckled nose, and his mind held captive by troubled visions of
school.

A day or two after Tommy's departure, the poet stooped, in a side path
of his garden, to pick up a stray sheet of paper.

On it he saw two words in his own handwriting.

"Mollie--folly--"

He sighed.

"I remember," he said.

Then he looked again, for in a round, sprawling hand was written yet
another word--"jolly."

The poet wiped his glasses and folded up the paper.

Then he coughed.

"I had not thought of that," he observed, meditatively.




VI

IN WHICH FOUR MEN MEET A TRAIN


A hot August noon blazed over Becklington common, as I lay thinking and
thinking, staring up into the blue sky, and for all the richness of the
day, sad enough in heart.

In the valley below me the stream still splashed happily down to the
mill, and away on the far hills the white flocks were grazing peacefully
as ever.

And above my head poised and quivering sang a lark.

The Spring had rounded into maturity, and Summer, lavish and wonderful
and queenly, rested on her throne.

Why should there be war anywhere in the world? I asked.

And yet along a far frontier it flickered even now, sinister and
relentless. A little war and, to me, a silent one--yet there it rose and
fell and smouldered, and grew fierce, and in the grip of it two brave
grey eyes had closed forever.

I heard the quiet, well-known voice.

"Tommy is not an ordinary boy," it said.

How we had smiled at the simple honest pride that this soldier had taken
in his son.

I turned over and groaned, as I thought of it all--our parting in the
old study--our promise--the half-comedy, half-responsibility of the
situation.

And we had borne it so lightly, tossed for the boy, taken him more as an
obstreperous plaything than a serious charge.

And now--well it matters not upon which of us the mantle of his legal
guardian had fallen, nor upon whom lay the administration of his
affairs--for we all had silently renewed our vows to one who was dead,
and felt that there was something sacred in this mission, which lay upon
the shoulders of each one of us.

Poor Tommy--none of us knew how the blow had taken him, for to none of
us had he written since the news reached England, save indeed when, in a
brief line to me, he had announced his return next week.

We had all written to him, as our separate natures and feelings had
dictated, but no reply had reached us--and how should we know that of
all the letters he had received, only one was deemed worthy of
preservation--and that written in a round childish hand?

"Dear Tommy--I am so sorry. Your loving Madge."

A damp sorry little note it was, but it remained in Tommy's pocket long
after our more stately compositions had been torn up and forgotten.

To us, leading our quiet commonplace peaceful life in this little
midland village, the shock had come with double force.

Perhaps we had been apt to dwell so little on the eternal verities of
chance and change and life and death as to have become almost oblivious
of their existence, at any rate in our own sphere.

Those of the villagers who, year by year, in twos and threes, were
gathered to their fathers, were old and wrinkled and ready for death,
resting quietly under the good red earth, well content with sleep.

And these we had missed, but scarcely mourned, feeling that, in the
fitness of things, it was well that they should cease from toil.

But here was our friend, straight and strong and vigorous, cut down by
some robber bullet in an Indian pass--and to us all, I fancy, the shock
came with something of terror, and something of awakening in its
tragedy. Outwardly we had shown little enough.

The poet, when the first stun of the blow had passed, had written his
grief in the best lines I had ever seen from his pen.

The vicar had preached a quiet scholarly sermon in our friend's memory.

And now all reference to the dead had ceased among us, for the time.

To-morrow, Tommy was to come back from school, and all of us, I fancy,
dreaded the first meeting.

We had arranged that each of our houses was to be open to him, and that
in each a bed should be prepared, so that, as the mood took him, he
might sleep where he thought best.

But the meeting, at the station, was a matter of considerable
trepidation to us.

I strolled down the hill to the poet's house.

"Good morning," I said, "I--I am rather keen on running up to town,
to-morrow, to see those pictures, you know."

The poet smiled.

"I did not know you were a patron of art," he observed. "I am gratified
at this development."

"Ah--could you meet Tommy at 2.15?"

The poet's face fell.

"I--I am very busy," he said, deprecatingly.

"'Lucien and Angelica' ought to be concluded by to-morrow evening."

We were silent, both looking into the trembling haze, up the valley.

"The doctor," suggested the poet.

"I will try."

But the doctor was also very much engaged.

"Two cases up at Bonnor, in the downs," he explained.

I called on the vicar.

"I--I want to go up to town to see that china exhibit," I observed.

He looked interested.

"I didn't know you were a connoisseur," he remarked.

"Not at all, not at all--the merest tyro."

"I am glad. You will find the show well worth your attention."

I bent my head to the vicar's roses.

"These Richardsons are very lovely," I said.

The vicar smiled.

"I think they have repaid a little trouble," he said modestly.

"Ah--could you possibly meet the 2.15 to-morrow?"

"You are expecting a parcel?"

"No--not exactly. Tommy, you know."

The vicar took a turn on the lawn. Then he came to a standstill in front
of me.

"I had planned a visit to Becklington," he said.

I bowed.

"I am sorry," said I, and turned to go.

At the gate he touched my shoulder.

"Mathews!"

I paused.

"I am a coward, Mathews--but I will go."

We looked into each other's eyes, and I repented.

"No, old friend. I ought to go and I will go. By Jove, I will."

"So be it," said the vicar.

I had played with my luncheon, to the concern of my man, who regarded me
anxiously.

"Are you not well, sir?" he asked.

"Quite well," I replied, icily, with a remark about bad cooking, and
careless service, and strode towards the station.

I paced the platform moodily twenty minutes before the advertised
arrival of the train.

I was very early, but somebody, apparently, was before me.

I caught a glimpse of a strangely characteristic hat in the corner of
the little waiting-room.

Its shapelessness was familiar.

I looked in, and the poet seemed a little confused.

"Lucien and Angel--?" I began, enquiringly.

He waved his hand, with some superiority.

"Inspiration cannot be commanded," he observed. "They shall wait until
Saturday."

We sat down in the shade, and conversation flagged. Presently steps
approached, pacing slowly along the wooden platform.

It was the vicar.

He looked a little conscious, and no doubt read the enquiry in my eyes.

"It is too hot," he said, "to drive to Becklington before tea," and the
three of us sat silently down together.

At last a porter came, and looked up and down the line.

Apparently he saw no obstruction, for he proceeded to lower the signal.

We rose and paced to and fro, with valorously concealed agitation.

A trap dashed along the white road, and some one ran, breathlessly, up
the stairs.

He seemed a little surprised at the trio which awaited him.

"I thought you had two cases in Bonnor," I observed, with a piercing
glance.

The doctor looked away, but did not reply, and I forbore to press the
point.

Far down the line shone a cloudlet of white smoke and the gleam of brass
through the dust.

"Becklington, Harrowley, Borcombe and Hoxford train," roared the porter,
apparently as a reminder to the station-master, for there were no
passengers.

We stood, a nervous group, in the shadow of the waiting-room.

"Poor boy--poor little chap," said the vicar at last. "We must cheer
him up--God bless him."

Youth is not careless of grief, but God has made it the master of
sorrow, and Tommy's eyes were bright, as he jumped onto the platform.

He smiled complacently into our anxious faces--so genuine a smile that
our poor carved ones relaxed into reality.

"I've got a ripping chameleon," he observed cheerfully.




VII

IN WHICH MADGE WHISTLES IN A WOOD


Through the still boughs the sunlight fell, as it seemed to me, in
little molten streams, and I pushed back my chair still deeper into the
shadow of the elm.

Even there it was not cool, but at any rate the contrast to the glaring
close-cropped lawn was welcome.

I stared up through the listless, delicate leaves into a sky of
Mediterranean blue. Surely, it was the hottest day of summer--of memory.

The flowers with which my little garden is so profusely peopled hung
languorously above the borders, and the hum of a binder in the
neighbouring wheat field seemed an invitation to siesta.

Down sunny paths, I dropped into oblivion.

A touch awoke me, but my eyes were held tight beneath a pair of cool
hands.

"Good gracious," I gasped. "Bless my----"

Tommy laughed and sauntered into view.

"You were making a beastly row," he observed, frankly. "I thought it was
a thunderstorm."

I looked at him with envious eyes.

His sole attire consisted of a striped blazer and a pair of
knickerbockers. He was crowned in a battered wide-awake hat, and from
this to the tips of his brown toes he looked buoyant and cool despite
the tan on his chest and legs.

He deposited the rest of his garments and a towel upon the grass, and
sprawled contentedly beside them.

"It was so jolly hot that I didn't bother about dressing," he observed,
lazily.

Then he sat up quickly.

"I say; you don't mind, do you? it's awful slack of me to come round
here like this."

"Not a bit," said I, as my thoughts fled back to the days when I also
was lean and springy, and blissfully contemptuous of changes in the
weather.

Ah, well-a-day--well-a-day!

  Linger the dreams of the golden days--
    They were bright, though they fled so soon,
  Rosy they gleamed in the early rays
    Of the sun, that dispelled them at noon.

The joys of reminiscence are mellow, but at times they may become a
little soporific--I awoke with a start.

"Whoo--ee."

It was a whistle, low and penetrating, and would seem to have risen from
the wood beyond the stream.

I noticed that Tommy was alert and listening.

"Whoo--ee."

Again it rose, with something of caution in its tone, but a spice of
daring in the higher note of its conclusion.

I watched Tommy, idly, with half-closed eyes.

He was performing a rapid toilet.

Presently he looked up at me from his shoe-laces.

"I taught her that whistle," he observed, complacently.

"Whom?" I asked.

"Why, Madge--Madge Chantrey," he said.

"You seem to have found an apt pupil."

"Rather."

"But I hope," I spoke severely, "I trust, Tommy, that you haven't taught
her to play truant."

He looked at me, cheekily; then he vanished through the gate.

"Happy dreams," he said, "and, I say, don't snore _quite_ so loudly, you
know."

And I heard him singing as he ran through the wood.

Said Madge, from the first stile, on the right:

"I managed it beautifully; she was reading some of those stupid rhymes
by the poet--only I oughtn't to call them names, because he's a friend
of yours--and I watched her getting sleepier and sleepier, and then I
came through the little gate behind the greenhouse and simply ran all
the way, and, I expect, she's fast asleep, and I wonder why grown-up
people always go to sleep in the very best part of all the day."

"I think it's their indigestions, you know," said Tommy thoughtfully.

"But they never eat anything all day--only huge big feeds at night."

"I think everybody's a _little_ sleepy after lunch."

"I'm not."

"Not after two helps of jam roll?"

"How do you know I had two helps?"

"Never mind," said Tommy, then.

"See that spadger," he cried suddenly.

"Got him, no--missed him, by Jove."

The sparrow was twittering, mockingly, behind the hedge, and a
bright-eyed rabbit scuttled into safety.

"Let's go through the park," cried Tommy.

"I'll show you a ripping little path, right by the house, where there's
a cave I made before--no one knows it but father and I, an' you can go
right by it, an' never see it. Come on."

They scrambled over the iron railings that bound the neat, though
modest, domain surrounding Camslove Grange. Through the tall tree trunks
they could see the old house with its rough battlements and extended
wings. In front of it the trim lawns sloped down to the stream, while
behind, the Italian garden was cut out of a wild tangle of shrubs and
brushwood.

Into this Tommy plunged, with the unerring steps of long acquaintance,
holding back the branches, as Madge followed close upon his heels.

Once he turned, and looked back eagerly into her eyes.

"We're just by the path now--Isn't it grand?"

"Rather," she said.

Presently, with much labour, they reached a microscopical track through
the underwood.

"There," observed Tommy, with the proud air of a proprietor, "Didn't I
tell you?"

"No one could possibly find it, I should think," said Madge.

"Rather not. Let's go to the cave."

Followed some further scrambling, and Tommy drew back the bushes
triumphantly.

"See--" he began, but the words died upon his lips, for there, standing
all unabashed upon this sacred ground, was a boy about his own age.

Tommy stammered and grew silent, looking amazedly at the stranger. He
was a pale boy with dark eyes, and a Jewish nose.

"You are trespassing," he said coolly.

Tommy gasped.

"Who--who are you?" he asked at last.

"I tell you you are trespassing."

Tommy flushed.

"I'm not," he said. "I--I belong here."

The other boy gave a shout.

"Father," he cried, "Here's some trespassers."

Tommy stood his ground, surveying the intruder with some contempt, while
Madge wide-eyed held his arm.

There were footsteps through the bushes, and a tall stout man in a
panama hat came into view.

"Hullo," he said, "This is private property, you know."

Tommy looked at him gravely.

"I don't understand--I--I belong here, you know."

The big man smiled.

"You're a native, are you?" he said cheerfully. "Well, you're a pretty
healthy looking specimen--but this place here is mine--for the time, at
any rate."

"It was my father's," said Tommy, with a strange huskiness in his
throat.

"Don't know anything about that--got it from the agents for six
years--like to see the deed, heh?" and he chuckled, a little
ponderously.

Tommy looked downcast and hesitant, and the big man turned to his son.

"Well, well," he said, "I guess they'll know better next time. Take 'em
down the drive, Ernie, and show 'em out decently."

The three walked silently down the old avenue.

At the gate, the pale boy turned to Tommy.

"Back my father's got more money than yours," he said.

Tommy's eyes swept him with a look of profound contempt, but a lump in
his throat forbade retort, and he turned away silent.

Madge, dear little woman, saw the sorrow in his eyes, and held her
peace, picking flowers from the bank as they walked slowly down the
path.

On a green spray a little way ahead a bird was singing full-throated and
joyous, but to Tommy its music was mockery.

He took a long aim and brought the little songster, warm and quivering,
on to the pathway in front of them.

As they came to it he kicked it aside, but Madge, stooping, lifted it
from the long grass and hid it, quite dead, in her frock.

The tears had risen to her eyes, and she was on the point of challenging
this seemingly wanton cruelty.

But there was something in Tommy's face that her eyes were quick to
notice, and she was silent.

Thus is tact so largely a matter of instinct.

And, in a minute, Tommy turned to her.

"I--I should jolly well like to--to kill that chap," he said.

Madge said nothing, fondling the warm little body that she held beneath
her pinafore.

As they turned the corner of the hedge, they came into the full flood of
the sunlight over the meadows, and Tommy smiled.

"I say, I'm awfully sorry we should have got turned out like that,
Madge, but I--I didn't know there was somebody else in there--an' that
I wasn't to go there, an' that."

"Never mind," said Madge, "let's come up home, and I'll show you my
cave--I've got one, too. It's not so good as yours, of course, because
you're a boy, but I think it's very pretty all the same, and it's
_almost_ as hard to get at."




VIII

IN WHICH TWO ADJECTIVES ARE APPLIED TO TOMMY


  My lady's lawn is splashed with shade
  All intertwined with sun,
  And strayingly beneath the boughs
  Their tapestry is spun,
  For the angel hands of summer-time
  Have woven them in one.

  My lady's lawn is wrapped with peace,
  Its life throbs sweet and strong.
  Caressingly across its breast
  The laughing breezes throng,
  And the angel wings of summer-time
  Have touched it into song.

"Thank you," said Lady Chantrey. "I feel so honoured, you know, to have
my little garden immortalised in verse."

The poet wrapped up his papers and restored them to his pocket, with a
smile.

"Not immortalised, Lady Chantrey," he replied modestly, "not even
described--only, if I may say so, appreciated."

From her invalid chair, in the shade, Lady Chantrey looked out over the
lawn, sunny and fragrant, a sweet foreground to the wide hills beyond.

She turned to the poet with something like a sigh.

"I wonder why it is that we fortunate ones are so few," she said. "Why
we few should be allowed to drown ourselves in all this beauty, that so
many can only dream about. It would almost seem a waste of earth's good
things."

The poet was silent.

"After all, they can dream--the others, I mean," he said, presently.

"But never attain."

"It is good that they know it is all here--somewhere."

Lady Chantrey lay back in her chair.

"I wish I could give it to them," she said, opening her hands. "I wish I
could give it to them, but I am so stupid, and weak, and poor;--you
can."

"I?" stammered the poet.

She looked at him, with bright eyes.

"You have the gift," she said. "You can at any rate minister to their
dreams."

"But nobody reads poetry, and I--I do not write for the crowd."

She shook her head.

"I think everybody reads poetry," she said, "and I think, in every
house, if one could but find it, there is some line or thought or dream,
if you will, cut out, long since, and guarded secretly--and more,
read--read often, as a memory, perhaps only as a dream, but, for all
that, a very present help--I would like to be the writer of such a
poem."

"It would certainly be gratifying," assented the poet.

"It would be worth living for."

The poet looked at her gravely--at the sweet-lined face, and the white
hair, and tired grey eyes.

"Do you know, Lady Chantrey," he said, "you always give me fresh
inspiration. I--I wonder--"

But what the poet wondered was only the wonder, I suppose, of all
writers of all ages, and, in any case, it was not put into words, for
across the lawn came a rustle of silk and muslin, heralding visitors,
and the poet became busy about tea-cups and cream.

Though physical weakness, and want of means, prevented Lady Chantrey
from entertaining to any large extent, yet I doubt if any woman in the
county was more really popular than this gentle hostess of Becklington
Hall; for Lady Chantrey was of those who had gained the three choicest
gifts of suffering--sweetness and forbearance and sympathy.

Such as Lady Chantrey never want for friends, for indeed they give, I
fancy, more than they receive.

On this sunny afternoon several groups were dotted about the cool lawns
of Becklington, when Tommy and Madge came tea-wards from the cave.

Lady Chantrey beckoned them to her side.

"I am so glad to see you again, Tommy," she said. "You never come to see
me now. I suppose old women are poor company."

"I wish they were all like you," said Tommy, squatting upon the grass at
her feet.

Then he remembered a question he had meant to ask her,

"I say, Lady Chantrey, who's living at the Grange?"

She shook her head.

"I don't know, Tommy. I heard that your guardian had let it--it was your
father's wish, you know--but I did not know the tenants had arrived."

"Oh, Lady Chantrey, there's a boy there, an' he's such an awful cad."

"Cad?" echoed Lady Chantrey, questioningly.

"He--he isn't one little atom of a gentleman."

"And therefore a cad?"

Tommy coloured.

"He's an awful bounder, Lady Chantrey."

Everybody was busy in conversation, and Lady Chantrey laid a frail hand
on Tommy's shoulder--then,

"Tommy," she said in a low voice, "a gentleman never calls anyone a
cad--for that reason. It implies a comparison, you see."

Tommy blushed furiously, and looked away.

"I--I'm awful sorry. Lady Chantrey," he mumbled.

"Tell me about your holidays," she said.

A servant stepped across the lawn to Lady Chantrey's chair followed by a
stout lady, in red silk.

"Mrs. Cholmondeley," she announced.

"And how do you do, my dear Lady Chantrey? Feeling a little stronger, I
hope. Ah, that's very delightful. Isn't it too hot for anything? I have
just been calling at the dear Earl's--Lady Florence is looking so
well--"

Mrs. Cholmondeley swept the little circle gathered about the tea-table
with a quick glance. It is good to have the Earl on one's visiting
list.

Her eyes rested on Mollie Gerald, pouring out tea, and she turned to
Lady Chantrey:

"Is that the young person who has been so successful with your
daughter's music, Lady Chantrey?"

Mollie's cheeks were scarlet, as she bent over the tea-pot, for Mrs.
Cholmondeley's lower tones were as incisive as her ordinary voice was
strident.

"Yes, that is my friend, Miss Gerald," said Lady Chantrey, smiling at
Mollie.

Mrs. Cholmondeley continued a diatribe upon governesses.

"You never know, _dear_ Lady Chantrey, who they may be. So many of them
are so exceedingly--"

She shrugged her shoulders.

"I have been very fortunate," said Lady Chantrey.

Tommy wandered up with some cake, which he offered to Mrs. Cholmondeley,
who smiled graciously.

"And who is this?" she asked.

Lady Chantrey explained.

"Not the poor colonel's heir?"

Lady Chantrey nodded.

"Really; how interesting--how are you, my dear?"

"All right," said Tommy, in obvious good health.

"This is Mrs. Cholmondeley, of Barnardley."

Tommy looked interested.

"I've heard about you from Mrs. Chundle," he said. "She's a sort of
relation of yours, derived from the same lot, you know."

Mrs. Cholmondeley looked a little bewildered, and the poet patently
nervous.

"Really I--"

"She's an awful good sort--Mrs. Chundle. She's the poet's
housekeeper--so I expect she has to work for her living, you know."

The poet gasped.

"It's--it's all a mistake," he stammered, but not before Mrs.
Cholmondeley had turned a violent purple, and a smile had travelled
round the little ring of visitors.

All at once Tommy became aware that somehow things had gone wrong and
retreated hastily from the lawn, seeking the refuge of the cave among
the laurels, and in a minute or two, the poet, with a murmured pretext
about a view, also vanished.

Tommy wandered disconsolately down the flagged path between the bushes,
ruminating upon the strange contrariness of affairs on this chequered
afternoon.

Near the arbour in the laurels Miss Gerald met him.

Her eyes were dancing.

"O, Tommy, you celestial boy," she cried.

Tommy was doubtful of the adjective, but the tone was certainly one of
approbation, and he looked modestly at the path.

"You're a perfect young angel," proceeded Miss Gerald, enthusiastically,
"and I'd kiss you only I suppose you wouldn't like it."

Tommy looked at her, dubiously.

"I shouldn't very much," he observed, but chivalry stepped manfully to
the fore, and he turned a brown cheek towards her.

"You can if you like, you know," he added, looking resignedly across the
valley.

She stooped and dropped a kiss upon his cheek.

"You're the very broth of a boy," she said, as she ran back to the
house.

Presently the laurels rustled, and the poet stole out into the pathway.

Tommy was disappearing into a sidewalk, and the poet looked after him
with a curious expression.

"O you incomprehensible person," said he.




IX

IN WHICH TOMMY CLIMBS A STILE


"You daren't climb into the hay-loft."

"Daren't I?" said Tommy, scornfully. "You see if I don't." And he
shinned easily up the ladder.

The hay-loft was cool and fragrant--a welcome contrast to the glaring
yard.

"Come up too," said Tommy.

Madge's black eyes flashed.

"I will," she said, clambering up the steps.

Tommy stooped down and gave her a hand.

"Good girl," he said, approvingly. Then he laid his hand on her lips,
and they crouched back into the shade.

For into the barn stepped one of the farm labourers.

"We mustn't get found out, for the man here is an awful beast of a
chap," said Tommy, in a low whisper.

The labourer had not perceived them and was soon bent over a machine
chopping up fodder for the cattle.

His back was towards them, and he breathed heavily, for the work was
hard. His red neck formed a tempting target, and Tommy was an accurate
shot. Moreover, his pockets were full of peas.

He took a careful aim and let fly, and there was a hoarse exclamation
from the man at the wheel.

Tommy drew back into shelter, where Madge was curled up in the new hay.

"Got him rippingly," said Tommy, "plumb in the back of the neck."

Madge looked a little reproachful.

"O Tommy, it must have hurt him dreadfully."

Tommy chuckled.

"'Spect it did tickle him a bit," he said, looking cautiously round the
corner.

The man had resumed work and the hum of the wheel filled the barn.

Tommy selected another portion of the man's anatomy and let fly a little
harder.

There was a shout and a sound of muttered exclamation in the barn below
them, as Tommy backed into the hay with quiet enjoyment.

As they listened they could hear the man stumping round the barn,
swearing softly, and presently he was joined by some one else, for a
loud voice broke into his grumbling.

"What the dickens are you doing, Jake?"

"Darned if I know," said the man. "On'y there bees summat as hits I
unnever I goes at the wheel, master."

"That's the farmer himself just come in," said Tommy burrowing deeper
into the hay.

They could hear him speaking.

"Get on wi' your work, Jake, an' don't get talkin' your nonsense to me,
man."

The man grumbled.

"Darned if it are nonsense, master," he said. "Just you wait till you be
hit yoursen--right in the bark o' your neck, too."

"O Tommy, do hit him--the farmer I mean."

Tommy shook his head.

"It wouldn't do," he said.

Madge looked at him with a challenge in her eyes.

"You daren't," she whispered.

Tommy flushed.

"We should be caught."

"Oh--then you daren't?"

Tommy was silent, and the farmer's foot was heavy in the barn below.

"You daren't," repeated Madge.

Tommy looked at her, with bright eyes.

"All right," he said. "If you want to see, look round the corner, only
don't let him cob you."

Then he drew back a little from the opening and took a flying shot,
finding a target in one of the farmer's rather conspicuous ears.

He gave a sudden yell, and his pale eyes seemed to stand out from his
head, as he looked amazedly round the building.

The man at the wheel spat into his hands, with a quiet grin.

"Darned if they ain't hit you, master," he said, grinding with some
zest.

"My word, they shall pay for it," shouted the farmer, conning the
situation with frowning brows.

Then he stepped to the ladder.

"See as they don't get out, Jake, if I send anyone down," he said
loudly, and Jake grunted an assent.

Madge was trembling.

"O Tommy, I'm so sorry. It's all my fault. Tell him it's all my fault."

"It's all right," said Tommy cheerfully, "He--he won't dare to touch
me."

A pair of red cheeks appeared above the floor of the loft, and the pale
eyes looked threateningly into the gloom.

In a minute they encountered Tommy's brown ones, bright and defiant.

The farmer grunted.

"Bees you there, eh?" he asked.

Tommy grinned.

"All right, you needn't get shirty," he said.

"Shirty, eh? I wunt get shirty. Don't you make no mistake. Jake!"

"Ah!"

"My stick down there?"

"Ah."

"Will you 'ave it up 'ere or down yon, young man?"

Tommy flushed hotly, and Madge held his arm.

"You daren't hit me," he said.

The farmer laughed.

"You've bin trespassin' more'n once, young man, wi' your catapult an'
your sharp tongue, an' now I'm goin' to 'ave my bit. Up 'ere or down
yon?"

Tommy temporized.

"Let us come down," he said, eyeing the door warily.

"Young miss, you get down first," said the farmer.

Madge obeyed with pale cheeks, and stood, half in sunlight, at the door.

"Jake!"

"Ah!"

"See the young rip don't get out."

"Ah!"

Tommy clambered down, standing between the two men. Then he made a bolt
for freedom, dodging Jake's half-hearted attempt at resistance.

But the farmer held him as he recoiled from Jake and jerked him over a
truss of hay.

And for the next few minutes Tommy was very uncomfortable.

"Oh, you cad, you cad, you beastly, putrid cad."

Tommy spoke between his teeth at each stroke of the farmer's stick.

The man released him in a minute or two, and Tommy rushed at him with
both fists. The farmer laughed.

"Guess you won't come knockin' about this barn again in a hurry," he
said as he pushed him easily into the yard and closed the great door
with a thud.

For a moment Tommy stood, white with anger. Then he thought of Madge,
who had been a spectator of the tragedy. But she was nowhere to be
seen, and he walked gloomily down the lane.

Now Madge, with a beating heart and a stricken conscience, had fled for
help, running blindly down the lane, with the idea of securing the first
ally who should appear.

And she almost ran into the arms of the pale boy from the Grange.

"Hullo, what's the matter?" he asked, looking at Madge curiously.

Madge blurted out the story, with eager eyes.

'Could he help her? Was there anybody near who could save Tommy from a
probable and violent death?'

The pale boy looked at her admiringly, as he considered the question.

Then,

"My father knows the man--he owes my father some money, I think. I'll
see if I can do anything."

They ran down the lane together, and doing so encountered Tommy,
flushed and ruffled.

"O, Tommy"--Madge began, but stopped suddenly, at the look on Tommy's
face.

For to Tommy this seemed the lowest depth of his degradation, that the
pale boy should be a witness of his discomfiture.

He looked at them angrily, and then, turning on his heel, struck out
across the fields, the iron entering deeply into his soul.

Youth is imitative, and Tommy had often heard the phrase.

"I--I don't care a damn," he said.

For a moment he felt half-frightened, but the birds were still singing
in the hedge, and, in the next field, the reapers still chattered gaily
at their work.

Moreover, the phrase seemed both consolatory and emphatic.

"I don't care a damn," he repeated, slowly, climbing the stile, into the
next field.

Said a voice from behind the hedge:

"Girl in it?"

Tommy looked round, and encountered a tall young man in tweeds. He was
looking at him, with amused eyes.

"I--I don't know what you mean," said Tommy.

The young man laughed.

"They're the devil, girls are," he observed.

Tommy was puzzled and eyed the stranger cautiously, thinking him the
handsomest man he had seen.

Nor, in a way, was he at fault, for the young man was straight, and
tall, and comely.

But there was something in the eyes--a lack of honest lustre--and in the
lips--too sensuous for true manliness, that would have warned Tommy, had
he been older, or even in a different frame of mind. Just now, however,
a friend was welcome, and Tommy told his tale, as they strolled through
the fields together.

Presently,

"You belong to Camslove Grange, don't you?" asked the stranger.

"I did."

"And will again, I suppose, eh?"

Tommy looked doubtful, and the young man laughed.

"Sorry--I ought to have put it the other way round, for it will belong
to you."

Tommy shook his head.

"I don't think so," he said. "Some other Johnny's got it, you see."

The young man looked at his watch.

"My name's Morris--I live at Borcombe House--you'd better come and feed
with me."

"Thanks, I'd like to, awfully."

"That's right--the old man will be glad to see you, and we'll have a
game of billiards."

"I can't play."

"Never mind. I'll teach you--good game, pills."

Squire Morris was cordial from the grip of his hand to the moisture in
his baggy eyes.

"The heir of Camslove," he said. "Well, well, I am so glad to see you,
dear boy, so very glad to see you. You must come often."

For a moment a misgiving arose in Tommy's heart.

"Did you know my father?" he asked, as the old man held his hand.

"Yes, yes; not as well as I would have liked to know him, by no means as
well as I would have liked to know him--but I knew him, oh yes. I knew
him well enough."

Tommy felt reassured, and the three entered the old hall, hung with
trophies of gun and rod and chase.

"A bachelor's abode," laughed the young man. "We're wedded to sport--no
use for girls here, eh dad?"

The squire laughed wheezily.

"The dog," he chuckled, "the young dog."

Presently the squire led them to the dining room, where a bountiful meal
was spread--so bountiful that Tommy, already predisposed for
friendship, rapidly thawed into intimacy.

Both the squire and his son seemed intent on amusing him, and Tommy took
the evident effort for the unaccomplished deed--for, in truth, the
stories that they told were almost unintelligible to him, though, to the
others, they appeared humorous enough.

Presently the squire grew even more affectionate. He had always loved
boys, he said, and Tommy was not to forget it. He was a stern enemy, but
a good friend, and Tommy was not to forget it. He would always be proud
to shake hands with Tommy, wherever he met him, and Tommy was to keep
this in remembrance.

Presently he retired to the sofa, with a cigar, which he was continually
dropping.

The young man winked, genially, at Tommy.

"He always gets sleepy about this time," he explained.

"Sleepy?" interrupted his father, "not a bit of it. See here," and he
filled the three glasses once more from the decanter.

"To the master of Camslove Grange," he cried, lifting his glass. And
they drank the health, standing.

As Tommy walked home over the starlit fields, the scene came back to
him.

The old man, wheezy but gracious, his son flushed and handsome, the
panelled walls and their trophies, and the sparkling glasses--a brave
picture.

True--he was still sore, but the episode of the farmer and his stick
seemed infinitely remote, and Madge and the pale boy, ghosts of an era
past: for had he not drunk of the good red wine, and kept company with
gentlemen?




X

IN WHICH I RECEIVE TWO WARNINGS, AND NEGLECT ONE


I suppose that, by this time, I had grown fond of Tommy, in a very real
way, for, as the weeks passed by, I was quick to notice the change in
the boy.

There was a suggestion of swagger and an assumption of manliness in his
manner, that troubled me.

I noticed, too, that he avoided many of his old haunts.

Often he would strike out across the downs and be away from early
morning until starlight, and concerning his adventures he would be
strangely reticent.

But I do not profess to have fathomed the ways and moods of boys, and I
merely shrugged my shoulders, perhaps a little sorrowfully.

"I suppose he is growing up," thought I. And yet, for all that, I could
not keep myself from wondering what influence was at work upon the
boy's development. Even the doctor, who, of us all, saw the least of
him, noticed the change, for he asked me suddenly, one late September
day,

"What's the matter with Tommy?"

I looked at him with feigned surprise.

"I--he's all right, isn't he?"

The doctor shook his head.

"He has altered very much this summer, and I am afraid the alteration
has not been good."

I cut at a nettle with my walking-stick.

"He is growing, of course."

The doctor raised his eyebrows.

"Then you have noticed nothing else--nothing in his demeanour or
conversation--or friends?"

I abandoned my defences.

"Yes, I have noticed it, and I cannot understand it--and I am sorry for
it."

"When does he return to school?"

"To-morrow."

The doctor appeared to be thinking. In a minute he looked into my face.

"It is a good thing, on the whole," he said, adding slowly.

"Don't drive the boy; let him forget."

He drove away, and I looked after him in some wonderment, for his words
seemed enigmatical.

As I walked back to my garden I could hear Tommy whistling in his
bedroom. There was a light in the room, and I could see him, half
undressed, fondling one of his white rats. I remembered how he had
insisted on their company and smiled.

"Sir."

From the shadow of the hedge a voice addressed me.

"Sir."

"Hullo," I said. Then, as I peered through the gloom, I saw a young
woman standing before me, and, even in the dusk, I could read the
eagerness in her eyes.

Her face was familiar.

"Surely I know you?" I asked.

"I'm Liza Berrill."

She spoke rapidly; yet, over her message she seemed hesitant.

Then:

"Oh, sir, don't let him be friends wi' that gentleman."

I stared.

"What do you mean?"

She pointed to the window!

Tommy was in his night-shirt, with the white rat running over his
shoulders.

"Well?"

"Master Tommy, sir. There's a-many 'ave noticed it; don't let 'im get
friends wi'----"

"With whom?"

Even in the dusk I could see the dull crimson creep into her cheeks.

"Squire Morris's son," she muttered.

We stood silent and face to face for a minute.

"You understand, sir?"

I remembered, and held out my hand.

"Yes, Liza; I understand. Thank you."

"Good night, sir."

"Good night."

She ran, with light footsteps, down the lane, and I stood alone beneath
the poplars.

Far up into the deepening sky they reached, like still black sentinels,
and between them glimmered a few early stars. In his bedroom I could see
Tommy, holding the white rat in one hand and kneeling a moment at his
very transient prayers.

I remembered a day whereon the colonel's riding-whip had been laid about
Squire Morris's shoulders.

My heart beat high at the thought, for the squire had insulted one whose
sweet face had long lain still. I thought of the son.

"Poor Liza," I murmured, and lifted the garden latch.

And as I looked up at Tommy's darkened window:

"God forbid," I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Next morning I called Tommy aside.

"Do you know young Morris, of Borcombe?"

He nodded.

"Tommy, I--I wish you would endeavour to avoid him in the future. He is
no fit companion for you."

"Why?"

"I--you would not understand yet, Tommy; you must take my word for it."

Tommy looked a little sullen.

"He's a jolly good sort," he said. "I know him well; he's a jolly good
sort."

"I am asking you, Tommy,"--I hesitated then. "For your father's sake," I
added.

Tommy looked straight into my eyes.

"He was a friend of father's," he said, quietly.

"Your father thrashed the squire with his own hand; I saw him do it."

Tommy stood very still.

"Why?"

"I--I cannot explain it exactly; you must take my word."

Tommy turned on his heels.

"He's a jolly good sort," he muttered.

"But you must not make him a friend."

Tommy was silent, kicking at the carpet.

"I shall if I like," he said, presently; and that was the last word.

And it was only when I came back, rather sadly, from the station that I
remembered the doctor's words and found a meaning for them.

"Oh, what a fool I am!" I said.




XI

IN WHICH TOMMY IS IN PERIL


Tommy spent his Christmas in town, with a distant relative, for I had
been called abroad upon a matter of business, and his Easter holidays,
since I was still away, were passed in Camslove vicarage.

It was, therefore, a year before I saw Tommy again, and on an August
morning I met him at the little station.

I think we were both glad to see each other, and I found Tommy a little
longer, perhaps a little leaner, but as brown and ruddy as ever.

"I say, it is ripping to get back here again, an' I've got into the
third eleven, an' that bat you sent me is an absolute clinker, an' how's
the poet, an' did you have a good time in Italy, an', I say, you are
shoving on weight, you know, an' there's old Berrill, an' I say,
Berrill, that's a ripping young jackdaw you sent, an' he's an' awful
thief--that is, he was, you know, but young Jones's dog eat him, or
most of him, an' I punched young Jones's head for letting 'em be
together, an' I say--how ripping the downs are looking, aren't they?"

Tommy's spirits were infectious, and on the way home it would be hard to
say which of us talked the most nonsense.

Our journey through the village was slow, for Tommy's friends were
numerous, and spread out over the whole social scale, from the
hand-to-mouth daysman to the unctuous chemist and stationer. They
included the vicar, leaning over his garden gate, in his shirt-sleeves,
surrounded by implements of horticulture, and also, I regret to say, the
pot-boy of the Flaming Lion--a graceless young scamp, with poacher
written in every lineament of his being.

I was not unprepared for his royal progress, since, during the summer, I
had been frequently accosted by his friends, of varying rank and
respectability, enquiring of "Master Thomas, sir."

"That young 'awk, sir, as I sent him last week?"

"Made many runs this year, sir, d'ye know?"

"Master Thomas in pretty good 'ealth, sir. Bad livin' in they big
schools, sir, ben't it?"

And so on.

Far down the road I saw a horseman, but Tommy could not, by any means,
be hurried, and a meeting I did not wish became inevitable.

As young Morris rode up he looked at me a little insolently--maybe it
was only my fancy, for prejudice is a poor interpreter of
expression--and nodded good day.

I saw that Tommy looked a little uncomfortable and his flow of chatter
ceased suddenly.

Morris bent from the saddle and called him, and as I turned to the shop
window I could hear them greeting one another.

I did not hear their further conversation, and it was only brief, but
the Tommy who walked home with me thenceforward was not the same who
had met me so buoyantly at the station.

Ah, these clouds, that are no greater than a man's hand and by reason of
their very slenderness are so difficult to dispel!

The early days of August sped away happily enough, and their adventures
were merely those of field, and stream, and valley, engrossing enough of
the time and fraught no doubt with lessons of experience, but too
trivial, I suppose, for record.

And yet I would rather write of them than of the day--the 8th of
August--when the Borcombe eleven beat Camslove by many runs.

And yet again, I am not sure, for a peril realised early, even through a
fall, may be the presage of ultimate victory.

I had been in town all day myself, and therefore had not been amongst
the enthusiastic little crowd gathered in the field behind the church to
watch this annual encounter, and a typical English country crowd it
was, brimful of sport--see the eager movements of those gnarled hands
and the light in the clear open-air eyes and wrinkled faces.

Camslove, too, had more than justified the prediction of their adherents
and had made a hundred and fifty runs, a very creditable score.

"An' if they can stand Berrill's fast 'uns they bees good 'uns,"
chuckled they of Camslove, as they settled down to watch the Borcombe
innings.

Tommy was hanging about the little tin-roofed pavilion, divided between
a natural patriotism and a desire to see his hero perform wonders, for
Squire Morris's son had consented to represent Borcombe.

Young Morris had never played for his village before, but his reputation
as a cricketer was considerable, and the country-side awaited his
display with some curiosity.

Nor were they disappointed, for in every way he played admirable
cricket, and even Berrill's fast ones merely appeared to offer him
opportunities of making boundary hits. His fellow cricketers spent more
or less brief periods in his company, and disconsolately sought the
shade of the pavilion and the trees, but Morris flogged away so
mercilessly that the Camslove score was easily surpassed, with three
wickets yet to fall, and in the end Borcombe obtained a very solid
victory.

Young Morris was not held in high esteem in the country-side, and there
were many who cordially disliked him--it was even whispered that one or
two had sworn, deeply, a condign revenge for certain deeds of his--but
he had played the innings of a master, and, as such, he received great
applause on his return to the pavilion.

Tommy was in the highest spirits, and, full of a reflected glory, strode
manfully, on his hero's arm, down the village street.

In the bar-room of the Flaming Lion many healths were drunk to the
victors, to the defeated, to Berrill's fast 'uns, to the young squire's
long success, to Tommy Wideawake.

Tommy, flushed and exultant, stood among the little group, with glowing
cheeks.

Presently a grimy hand pulled his sleeve. It was the pot-boy.

"Don't 'ee 'ave no more, sir--not now," he whispered. But Tommy looked
at him hotly.

"Can't a gentleman drink when he likes--damn you?" he asked.

The pot-boy slunk away, and a loud laugh rang round the little audience.

"Good on you, Tommy," cried Morris.

"Gentlemen, the girls--bless 'em." He filled their glasses, at his
expense, and coupled a nameless wish with his toast.

Tommy, unconscious of its meaning, drank with the others.

Then he walked unsteadily to the door. There was a strange buzzing in
his head, and a dawning feeling of nausea in him, which he strove to
fight down.

And as he stood at the porch, flushed and bright-eyed, Madge Chantrey
and the pale boy passed along the road. They were going to meet Miss
Gerald, but Tommy staggered out and faced them.

"Hullo, Madge, old girl," he said, but she drew back, staring at him,
with wide eyes.

The pale boy laughed.

"Why, he's drunk--dead drunk," he said.

Tommy lurched forward and struck him in the face, and in a moment the
pale boy had sent him rolling heavily in the road. I picked him up, for
I was passing on my way home from the station, and noticed the flush on
his cheeks, and saw that they were streaked with blood and dust.

They tell me that I, too, lost my temper, and even now I cannot remember
all I said to Morris and his satellites and the little crowd in the
Flaming Lion. I remember taking Tommy home, and helping my man to
undress and wash him and put him to bed, and I shall never forget the
evening that I spent downstairs in my study, staring dumbly over the
misty valley to the far downs, and seeing only two grave grey eyes
looking rebukingly into mine.

Late in the evening the vicar joined me, and we sat silently together in
the little study.

My man lit the lamp, and brought us our coffee, and came again to fetch
it away, untasted.

Perhaps you smile as you read this.

"You ridiculous old men," I can hear you say. "To magnify so trivial an
incident into a veritable calamity."

And, again, I can only plead that, in our quiet life, maybe, we attached
undue importance to such a slight occurrence.

Yet, nevertheless, to us it was very real, almost overwhelmingly real,
and the tragedy of it lay, nearly two years back, in the panelled study
of Camslove Grange.

Presently the vicar looked at me, and his face, in the red lamplight,
seemed almost haggard.

"'I could never repay the man who taught my boy to love God,'" he
repeated, "and he said those words to me--to me."

I bowed my head.

"And I--I accepted the responsibility, and it has come to this."

I was silent, and, indeed, what was there to say?

I suppose we both tried to think out the best course for the future, but
for myself my brain refused to do aught but call up, and recall, and
recall again, that last meeting in Camslove Grange:

"I want the old place to have a good master.

"I want my son to be a gentleman.

"God bless you, old comrades."

Back they came, those old ghosts of the past, until the gentle,
well-bred voice seemed even now appealing to me, and the well-loved form
apparent before my eyes. And I writhed in my chair.

A little later the poet came in. He looked almost frightened, and spoke
in a hushed voice.

"Is--is he better?" he asked.

"He is asleep," I answered, moodily.

The poet sighed.

"Ah! that's good, that's good."

For a little while we talked, the aimless, useless talk of unnerved men,
and at last the poet suggested we should go upstairs.

As I held the candle over Tommy's bed we could see that the flush had
faded from his cheeks, and as he lay there he might well have been a
healthy cherub on some earthly holiday.

I think the sight cheered us all, and in some measure restored our hope.

The vicar turned to us, gravely.

"There is one thing we can all do," he said; "we ought to have thought
of it first, and it is surely the best."

As we parted, the poet turned to me.

"I will take him over the downs with me to-morrow; they always appeal to
Tommy, and one is never saner, or nearer to God, or more ready for
repentance, than out there upon the ranges."

There was a sound of wheels down the lane, and in a minute the doctor
drove by.

"Hullo," he called out, cheerily, "I have just got myself a new bat."




XII

IN WHICH TOMMY MAKES A RESOLVE


It is one of the privileges of youth that alimentary indulgence is but
rarely penalized, and if either of us next morning was pale and
disinclined for breakfast it was certainly not Tommy.

On the contrary, he seemed cool, and fit, and hungry, and although he
looked at me occasionally in a shy, questioning way, yet he chattered
away much as usual, and made no reference to yesterday's adventures.

Only when the poet called for him and at the window I laid a hand upon
his shoulder to bid him a happy day, he turned to me, impulsively:

"You are a ripper," he said.

There is no sweeter or more genuine praise than a boy's.

I watched them down the lane, and my eyes sought the downs, clear, and
wide, and sunny. I thought of the tawdry inn, and its associations, and
prayed that Tommy might learn a lesson from the contrast.

Says Jasper the gipsy:

"Life is very sweet, brother; who would wish to die?"

Hark back to your well-thumbed Lavengro and you will find, if you do not
remember, his reasons.

Nor are they weightier than these:

"Night and day, brother, both sweet things; sun, moon and stars, all
sweet things; there's likewise a wind on the heath."

Deep in the heart of every boy lies something of the gipsy, and even if,
in after life, it grows sick and stifled by reason of much traffic among
crowded streets, yet I doubt if it ever so far vanishes that to it the
wind on the heath shall appeal in vain. Nor was the poet wrong in his
prognosis, for to Tommy, at any rate, it was full of unspoken messages
on this August morning. Wind on the heath--yes, it is always there,
clean, and strong, and happy, lingering with soft wings over furze and
bracken, full of whispered melodies from the harp of God.

Are you in trouble?

Go up and face this wind on the heath. Bare your head to it, open your
lungs to it. Let it steal about your heart, with its messages of
greatness, and futurity, and hope.

Are you listless and discouraged?

Go up and breathe this wind on the heath, and it will sting to life the
ambition and resolve in you, and in it you will hear, if you listen
aright, the saga of victory.

"In sickness, Jasper?"

"There's the sun and stars, brother."

"In blindness, Jasper?"

"There's the wind on the heath, brother: if I could only feel that, I
would gladly live forever. Dosta, we'll now go to the tents and put on
the gloves, and I'll try to make you feel what a sweet thing it is to be
alive, brother."

Tommy and the poet were bound for some ruins which lay across
Becklington common and beyond the downs.

Harvest ruled the world, and the fields in the valley and on the
hillside were dotted with stooks and stacks.

It was a day on which it was good to be alive, and, if a little subdued,
yet they were both in good spirits.

The poet's latest volume, ahead of the autumn rush of poetry and
fiction, had been favourably criticised.

It was stronger, happier, more real, said the critics, than any other
from his pen.

If not great, said they, it was at any rate graceful, and even, in some
places, vigorous. Therefore was the poet happy.

And Tommy--well, there was the sun and the wind, good red blood in his
arteries, and no care in his heart--and though he could not have told
you so, these, no doubt, were strong enough reasons for the buoyancy of
his spirit.

As they climbed the green side of the downs they met a shepherd singing,
a happy, irresponsible fellow, with his coat over his head, and his
sleek flock browsing round him.

And as they passed him with a welcome, the poet remembered some lines
which he repeated to Tommy:

  Wouldst a song o' shepherding, out upon the down,
  Splendid days o' summer-time, an' roaring days o' spring?
  I could sing it fine,
  If e'er a word were mine,
  But there's no words could tell it you--the song that I would sing.

  Wide horizons beckoning, far beyond the hill,
  Little lazy villages, sleeping in the vale,
  Greatness overhead
  The flock's contented tread
  An' trample o' the morning wind adown the open trail.

  Bitter storms o' winter-time ringing down the range,
  Angel nights above the hill, beautiful with rest,
  I would sing o' Life,
  O' Enterprise, and Strife,
  O' Love along the upland road, an' God beyond the crest.

  An' this should be my matin song--magic o' the down,
  Mystery, an' majesty, an' wistfulness, an' hope,
  I would sing the lay
  O' Destiny an' Day,
  As morning mounts the hill with me, an' summer storms the slope.

  But this would be my vesper song--best at last is Peace
  Whispered where the valleys lie, all deep in dying gold,
  Stealing through the gloam
  To speed the shepherd home
  With one last dreamy echo o' the music in the fold.

  Wouldst a song o' shepherding, out upon the down,
  Splendid days o' summer-time, an' roaring days o' spring?
  I could sing it fine,
  If e'er a word were mine,
  But there's no words could tell it you--the song that I would sing.

"Jolly good," said Tommy, easiest of critics, and the poet smiled.

"Ah, Tommy," he said, "I wish you were a publisher."

Over the crest of the downs rose a thin wisp of blue smoke; and as they
descended on the other side, some dark-eyed children looked out of a
little brown tent.

They reminded the poet of Jasper and his company of Pharaoh's children,
and he repeated to Tommy the conversation I have touched upon.

Tommy's eyes sparkled.

"That's good," he said, approvingly. "Just what a fellow feels, you
know."

They walked on across the green springy turf, and for a time both were
silent.

There was something, too, in the day and its purity that was speaking to
Tommy.

Presently he spoke, hesitatingly.

"I--I was drunk last night, wasn't I?" he asked anxiously.

The poet affected not to have heard the question, but Tommy persisted.

"Yes."

Tommy sighed.

"I say," he said, after a pause, "I--I'd have licked that fellow hollow
if my head hadn't been so jolly queer."

The poet looked at him, curiously.

"I expect you would," he said.

Tommy took a deep breath, and looked straight at the poet.

"I'll never touch it again--never," he said slowly.

They shook hands there on the hillside.

Thus it was, and for this reason, that Tommy took upon himself a vow
that he has to my best belief never broken.

"Ah, but the motive?" you ask.

Well, maybe the shrug of your shoulder is justified, but, after all, the
result was brought about by nature, who seldom errs, and to the poet,
who, in spite of all, was really a simple soul--the result was
abundantly gratifying.

As they walked home in the evening, Tommy turned to the poet.

"I say, what was it that gipsy fellow said--at the end, you know?"

"Dosta, we'll now go to the tent and put on the gloves, and I'll try to
make you feel what a sweet thing it is to be alive, brother."

Tommy looked grimly into the twilight.

"It would be a jolly good thing to teach that fellow at the Grange," he
said, "only I'm blowed if I'll take any gloves."




XIII

IN WHICH THE POET PLUCKS A FOXGLOVE


Madge sat by the window, swinging disconsolate legs and struggling, with
a nauseated heart, to master those Latin prepositions which govern the
ablative case. A more degraded army she had never encountered, and
though some misguided sage had committed them to rhyme, this device
merely added a flavour of hypocrisy to their obvious malevolence.
Moreover, the whole universe appeared to be so disgustingly cheerful
that the contrast was well nigh unbearable.

Beyond the open window the day was young and bright, and the honey bees
sang briskly over the lawn.

Even the gardener, most dismal of men, was humming: "A few more years
shall roll," a sure sign of unwonted buoyancy of spirit. Miss Gerald was
writing some letters for Lady Chantrey in another room, and Madge was
alone in the study.

Thus, every factor combined to make temptation almost irresistible.

And, naturally enough, it came, and in the guise of a well-known,
long-agreed-on whistle.

From the laurels it rose, low and clear, and Madge's heart jumped
quickly as she heard, for the whistle was Tommy's, and she could not
remember how long ago it was since she had heard it.

Then she remembered that it must not be answered--for was not Tommy in
disgrace--at any rate, as far as she was concerned?

And had they not quarrelled so deeply that repair was almost an
impossibility?

It was very presumptuous of him to think that she should answer it.

She would remain where she was, in icy stillness, mastering the
prepositions with an iron hand.

A pleasing sense of virtue stole into her being, mixed with visions of a
downcast, brown face somewhere in the shrubbery, and for five long
minutes silence reigned. Then the whistle rang out again, a little
louder, and surely it sounded almost penitent.

A picture of a broken-hearted Tommy, whistling in dry-eyed sorrow, rose
to her eyes.

It was true that his offences had been great, but then, was not
forgiveness divine?

Madge felt sure that this was so. Was it not written in fair characters
in her last copy-book?

She closed her book and stood by the glass doors.

It is but rarely that we rise to the divine. Yet here was an
opportunity, and down the steps she ran, light-footed, over the thin
strip of lawn and into the deep laurels.

And it was not Tommy after all, but only the pale boy who, with
commendable perspicacity, had borrowed Tommy's whistle.

For a moment Madge flushed angrily, for she did not greatly like the
pale boy, and this was a deception.

But the morning was sweet, and the pale boy was surely better than a
preposition.

"I say: let's go through the wood," he said. "I've hidden some
sandwiches in a tree up there and we'll have a picnic, and you can be
back in time for lunch."

"All right," said Madge, "come along."

And in the wood they met Tommy, with the light of resolve in his eye and
battle written in his face.

Madge was not quite sure whether she was glad or sorry to meet him, nor
could she tell, as they looked straight into one another's eyes, the
nature of Tommy's feelings on the subject.

He looked a little grave, and spoke as one who had rehearsed against a
probable encounter.

"I want to apologise to you for our meeting the other day," he said
stiffly.

Madge stared, and Tommy turned to the pale boy.

"And to you," he said.

The pale boy looked a little puzzled, but grinned.

"That's all right," he said. "I could see--"

"Excuse me, I haven't quite finished"--and the pale boy stopped, with
his mouth open.

"I think you had better go home, Madge."

"Why--Tommy?"

Tommy looked down.

"You had better--really," he repeated.

The pale boy interposed.

"She is out with me," he said.

"So I see--she had better go home."

"Why--who says so?"

"If she doesn't she will see you get a licking. P'raps--p'raps she
wouldn't like that."

Tommy still looked at the path.

"I--I'm not going to fight anyone to-day."

"You are--you're jolly well going to fight me, now."

The pale boy smiled, a little uncertainly.

"You--I shouldn't have thought you'd want a second dose," he said.

"Rather," said Tommy, cheerfully.

Madge looked from one to the other.

"Don't fight," she said. "Please--please don't fight--why should you?"

"You'd much better run home," said Tommy again.

"I shan't--I shall stay here."

Tommy sighed.

"All right," he said, taking off his coat. "Then, of course, you must,
you know."

"I tell you I'm not going to fight," repeated the pale boy.

"Rot," said Tommy.

Five minutes later Tommy contentedly resumed his coat, his face flushed
with victory.

The pale boy was leaning against a tree, with a handkerchief to his nose
and one eye awry, whimpering vindictive epithets at his opponent--but
Madge was nowhere to be seen.

Tommy looked up and down the leafy vistas a little disappointedly. Then,

"Never mind," he said, philosophically.

"By Jove, it's a jolly sweet thing is life--ripping, simply ripping.
Good bye, old chap. Sniff upwards and it'll soon stop. So long."

       *       *       *       *       *

In a brake where the wood falls back a little from the inroad of the
common the poet paused, for the gleam of a straw hat against a dark
background caught his eye.

"Why surely--no--yes, it is--how singular--so it is," he murmured,
wiping his glasses.

He left the path and struck out over the springy turf into the shade of
the wood, keeping his eyes nevertheless upon the ground, and walking
guilelessly, as one who contemplates.

And by chance his meditations were broken, and before him, among some
tall foxgloves, stood Mollie Gerald.

The poet looked surprised.

"How--how quietly you must walk, Miss Gerald," he said.

She laughed.

"How deeply you must think," she said.

"It--it is good to wake from thought to--to this, you know," he
answered, with a bow.

Miss Gerald looked comprehensively into the wood.

"It is pretty, isn't it?" she said.

"I was not referring to the wood," said the poet, hardily.

Miss Gerald bent over a foxglove rising gracefully over the bracken:

"Aren't they lovely?" she asked, showing the poet a handful of the
purple flowers.

"You came out to gather flowers?"

"Why, no. I came to look for my pupil."

"Surely not again a truant?"

"I am afraid so."

"It is hard to believe."

"And I stopped in my search to gather some of these. After all, it isn't
much good looking for a child in a wood, is it?"

"Quite useless, I should think."

"If they want to be found they'll come home, and if they don't, they
know the woods far better than we, and they'll hide."

"They always come back at meal-times--at least, Tommy does."

"I think meal-times are among the happiest hours of an average
childhood."

"Before the higher faculties have gained their powers of
appreciation--it depends on the child."

"Madge is not an imaginative child."

"Nor Tommy, I think, and yet I don't know. It is hard to appraise the
impressions that children receive and cannot record."

"And the experiment--how does it progress?"

"Alas, it is an experiment no longer; it is a very real responsibility,
and I am inadequate. Individually, I fancy we are all inadequate, and,
collectively, we do not seem quite to have found the way."

Miss Gerald nodded emphatically.

"Good," she said.

"Eh?"

"To feel inadequate is the beginning of wisdom; is it not so? There, I
have gathered my bunch."

"May I beg one foxglove for my coat?"

She laughed.

"There are plenty all round you. Why, you are standing in the middle of
a plant at this moment."

The poet stooped a little disconsolately, and plucked a stalk, and when
he looked up Miss Gerald was already threading her way through the
slender trunks.

"Good-bye," she cried, gaily, over her shoulder, and the poet raised his
hat.

As he sauntered back to the path the doctor rode by on his pony.

"Hullo," he said; "been picking flowers?"

The poet looked up.

"A pretty flower, the foxglove," he murmured.

"Digitalis purpurea--a drug, too, is it not?"

The doctor nodded.

"It has an action on the heart," he said. "Steadies and slows it, you
know."

But the poet shook his head.

"I fancy you are mistaken," he observed.




XIV

IN WHICH TOMMY CONVERSES WITH THE PALE BOY


A sky of stolid grey had communicated a certain spirit of melancholy to
the country-side--a spirit not wholly out of keeping with Tommy's mood.

The holidays were nearly over. The doctor was busy, the poet had a cold,
Madge had been sent away to school, and Tommy, for the nonce, felt a
little at a loss to know how to occupy these last mournful days of
freedom.

As he tramped, a trifle moodily, down the lane, a point of light against
a dark corner of the hedge caught his eye, and further examination
revealed the pale boy, smoking a cigarette.

Tommy had not yet aspired to tobacco, and for a moment felt a little
resentful.

But the memory of last week's battle restored his equanimity, and,
indeed, brought with it a little complacent contempt for the pale boy
and his ways.

"Hullo," said Tommy, pulling up in front of his reposing foe, and not
sorry to have some one to talk to.

The pale boy looked at him coldly.

"Well," he observed, cheerlessly.

Tommy sat down on the grass.

"I say, let's forget about all that," he said.

The pale boy puffed away in silence.

"Let's forget; you--you'd probably have whopped me, you know, if you'd
done some boxing at our place. You've a much longer reach than me,
an'--an' you got me an awful nasty hit in the chest, you know."

The pale boy looked at him gloomily.

"I don't profess to know much about fighting," he said, with some
dignity. "I think it's jolly low."

For a few minutes they sat in silence, then,

"Where do you go to school?" asked Tommy.

"I don't go anywhere; I've got a tutor."

"Oh!"

"You see, I'm not at all strong."

"Bad luck. You--ought you to smoke, if you're--if your constitution's
rocky, you know?"

The pale boy knocked the ashes off his cigarette.

"I find it very soothing," he said. "Besides, it's all right, if you
smoke good stuff. I wouldn't advise fellows who didn't know their way
about a bit to take it up."

The pale boy spoke with an air of superiority that awed Tommy a little.

"How--how did you come to know all about it?" he asked.

"Oh--just knocking about town, you know," replied the other, carelessly.

Tommy sighed.

"I hardly know anything about London," he said.

The pale boy looked at him, pityingly.

"I've lived there all my life," he said, "Dormanter Gardens, in
Bayswater--one of the best neighbourhoods, you know."

Tommy racked his memory.

"I was in London, at Christmas, with a sort of aunt-in-law," he said.
"She lives in Eaton Square, I think it is--somewhere near Maskelyne &
Cook's."

"I haven't heard of it," said the pale boy. "But London's so jolly big
that it's impossible to know all of it, and I've spent most of my time
in the West End."

Tommy was silent, but the pale boy seemed at home with his subject.

"I suppose you don't know the Cherry House," he continued. "It's an
awful good place to feed in--near the Savoy, you know. Reggie, he's my
cousin, takes me there sometimes. He always goes. He says there are such
damned fine girls there. I don't care a bit about 'em, though."

The pale boy smoked contemplatively.

"I think it's awful rot, thinking such a beastly lot about girls, and
all that sort of thing, you know, don't you?" said Tommy.

The pale boy nodded.

"Rather," he said. "I agree with dad. He says there's only one thing
worth bothering about down here."

"What's that?"

"Money," snapped the pale boy, looking at Tommy, between narrowed
eyelids. "I'm going to be a financier when I'm old enough to help dad."

Tommy stretched himself lazily.

"I'd rather be strong," he said.

The pale boy looked at him, curiously.

"What a rum chap you are. What's that got to do with it?"

Tommy lay back on the grass, and stared up at the passing clouds.

"I'm not a bit keen on making money, somehow," he said. "I'd just like
to knock around, and have a dog, and--a jolly good time, you know."

"What--always?"

Tommy sat up.

"Yes--why not?"

The pale boy shrugged his shoulders, and laughed.

"Oh, I don't know," he said. "But it seems funny, and don't you think
you'd find it rather slow?"

Tommy stared at him, with open eyes.

"Rather not," he said. "Why, think how ripping it would be to go just
where you liked, and come back when you liked, an' not to have any
beastly meal-times to worry about, an' no terms, an' a horse or two to
ride, an' wear the oldest clothes you had; by Jove, it would be
like--something like Heaven, I should think."

The pale boy laughed as he rose to his feet.

"It's beginning to rain," he said.

"Never mind," said Tommy, "I like the rain. It doesn't hurt, either, and
I like talking to you; you make me think of things."

The pale boy turned up his collar, and shivered a little.

"Let's find a shelter, somewhere," he said, looking round anxiously.

"We'd better walk home over the common," said Tommy. "Besides, it's
ripping walking in the rain, don't you think, an' it makes you feel so
good, an' fit, when you're having grub afterwards, in front of the
fire."

But the pale boy shook his head.

"I hate it," he said, "and I'm going up to the farm there, till it
stops."

Tommy cast an accustomed eye round the horizon.

"It won't stop for a jolly long while," he said. "However, do as you
like. We don't seem to agree about things much, do we? So long."

"Good-bye. It's all the way a fellow's brought up, you know."

And as Tommy shouldered sturdily through the rain, the pale boy lit
another cigarette and turned back towards the farm door.




XV

IN WHICH SOME PEOPLE MEET IN A WHEAT-FIELD


Never was such a harvest--such crops--such long splendid days--such
great yellow moons. Even now the folk tell of it when harvest-time comes
round.

"Ah," say they, and shake their heads, "that were a harvest an' no
mistake, an' long, an' long will it be afore us sees another such a
one."

Through the great white fields of wheat the binders sang from dew-dry to
dew-fall, and over the hills rang the call of the reapers.

All hands were called to the gathering, the gipsies from the hedge and
the shepherd from his early fold, and the stooks were built over the
stubble and drawn away into stacks, and still the skies shone cloudless
and the great moons rose over the dusk. Never was such a harvest. And
little we at home saw of Tommy in these days, save when, late at night,
he would wander back from one and another field, lean and sunburnt and
glad of sleep. One day the poet tracked him to the harvesting on the
down-side fields, and found him in his shirt-sleeves, stooking with the
best.

For a little while the poet, under considerable pressure from Tommy,
assisted also, but the unaccustomed toil soon became distasteful, and he
retired to the shade of a stook for purposes of rest and meditation.

And here, as he sat, he was joined by the same genial shepherd whom they
had met on the day they trod the downs to the Roman ruins.

"Deserted the flocks, then?" asked the poet.

The shepherd grinned.

"'Ess, sir. Folded 'em early, do 'ee see, sir, an' come down to make
some money at the harvest, sir."

He paused to fill his mouth with bread, taking at the same time a long
pull of cold tea.

"Hungry work, sir, it be, this harvest work."

"It must undoubtedly stimulate the appetite, as you say."

"'Ess, sir, that it do. But it's good work fer the likes o' I, sir, it
be, means more money, doan't 'ee see, sir; not as I bees in want o'
money, sir, but it's always welcome, sir. No, sir, I needn't do no work
fer a year an' more, sir, an' live like a gen'lman arl the time, too,
sir."

"You have saved, then?"

"'Ess, that I have, an' there's a many as knows it, sir, an' asked I to
marry 'em, sir, too, they 'as, but not I, sir. I sticks to what I makes,
sir. An' look 'ee 'ere, sir, money's easy spent along o' they gals, sir,
ben't it, onst they gets their 'ands on it?"

The poet looked at him reflectively.

"They ask you then, do they?"

"'Ess, sir, fower or five on 'em, sir. But I wants none on 'em, sir, an'
I tells 'em straight, sir."

The poet sighed.

"It must save a lot of trouble to--when the suggestion comes from the
fairer side."

The shepherd wiped his mouth with the back of his hand.

"Fower or five on 'em," he observed, meditatively.

"Dear, dear, what a--what a conqueror of hearts you must be!"

The shepherd looked at him a little dubiously.

"Fower or five on 'em," he repeated. "An' one on 'em earnin' eighteen
shillin' a week an' forty pound laid by. An' I walked out wi' 'er a bit,
I did, sir, but I warn't 'avin' none on 'er when she asked I to marry
'er, an' I told 'er, an' my parents, they was main angry, too, wi' me,
they was, sir.

"But there y'are, sir. I didn't want none o' 'er forty pounds, sir, an'
you bees got to stick to 'em wen you marries 'em, ben't 'ee, sir?"

The shepherd shook his head.

"No, sir, I don't believe in marryin' no one as you doesn't kind o'
like, do 'ee see, sir."

The poet nodded.

"An excellent sentiment," he said.

"Money ben't everything sir, bee 't, as I told 'em, sir, all on 'em.
Money ben't everythin'."

"But isn't it--isn't it a little embarrassing to be sought in matrimony
by four or five ladies?"

The shepherd paused, between two bites, and looked at the poet, in some
bewilderment.

"If 'ee means worrittin', sir--it bees a deal more worrittin' to ask
'em, yourself, sir--fower or five on 'em."

He rose and lurched off to join his comrades, and the poet looked after
him, with something of envy in his eyes.

"O you fortunate man," he murmured, as he lay back, watching the busy
scene, with half-closed eyes.

Presently he half started to his feet, for at the far end of the field
he could see Tommy talking to two newcomers, a tall, slender figure,
with a carriage and poise possessed by one alone, and a little girl in a
smock frock.

He rose and wandered slowly down the field.

"Four or five," he murmured, "and they asked him--O the lucky, lucky
man--they asked him. Dear me, dear me."

"A lovely evening, Miss Gerald."

Mollie looked up, with a smile, from the sheaf she was binding.

"Isn't it jolly--it must be a glad life these open-air folk lead, don't
you think?"

"The best of lives--but they don't know it."

Mollie rose, and tossed back a wisp or two of hair from her forehead.

"I am sure I should love it, if it were my lot--the white stems on my
arms and the warm sun on my face, and the songs in the wagon, at dusk.
Listen to that man singing there--I'm sure he is just glad of life."

"A strange man," said the poet, following her gaze. "A most curious,
fortunate person."

"You know him?"

"A little--he is quite a Napoleon of hearts."

Mollie laughed.

"He doesn't look even a little bit romantic."

"Oh, he isn't. I fancy the romance, if there is any, must be usually on
the other side. He has had four or five offers of marriage."

"What a perfectly horrid idea."

The poet stroked his chin.

"Yet think of the confusion and questioning of heart, and of the hours
of agony that it would save a diffident man."

"He doesn't look diffident."

"He may not be. I merely make a supposition."

"I think it's an appalling idea."

"Oh, I know, I know, and yet I can imagine it a bridge to paradise."

"I don't understand."

"Then, suppose a man so stormed by love that by it all life has been
renewed and made beautiful for him; and suppose this man so utterly and
in every way unsuited to its realisation, that though all there is in
him urges him to speak of it, yet he dare not lest he should lose even
the cold solace of friendship. Do you not see how it might----?"

Mollie's grey eyes looked him straight in the face.

"No," she said. "It would be better for him never to speak, than to lose
his ideal, as he assuredly would."

"You--you would bid him never speak?"

Mollie laughed.

"It depends on so many things--on how and why he was unsuitable, and by
whose standard he gauged his shortcoming."

"His own."

"He might be wrong."

"Who could know better?"

"The girl he asked."

"You would bid him ask?"

She was silent; then,

"If--if he were quite sure the girl were worthy," she said, in a low
voice.

The poet held out his hands.

"Mollie--my dear, my dear," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

"And she's quite young, too," observed Tommy, as they walked home in the
starlight.

The poet waved his hand.

"Love laughs at age--takes no account of it," he said.

"Hurrah," cried Tommy.




XVI

IN WHICH TOMMY CROSSES THE PLOUGHING


The early days of January were shadowed by Lady Chantrey's illness.

I fancy that over all hung the presentiment that it would bear her away
from our midst, and there was no home in Camslove or Becklington, nor a
heart in any of the far-scattered farms around them, but would be the
sadder for the loss.

And on a January afternoon she kissed Madge for the last time.

To Madge it seemed that heaven and earth alike had become black and
desolate, for ever, as she sobbed upon the bed-clothes, and besought her
mother to come back.

The household was too overwhelmed, and itself too sorrow-stricken to
take much notice at first of the child, and for an hour or more she lay
with her arms about her mother's neck.

Then, at last, she slipped from the bed and stole out into the dusk. A
thin rain was falling over the country-side, but she hardly noticed it
as she crossed the barren fields and stumbled through the naked hedges.

At the ploughing she stopped.

Something in the long, relentless furrows seemed to speak to her of the
finality of it all, and it was only when she flung herself down upon the
upturned earth that, as to all in sorrow, the great mother put forth her
words of cheer to her, as who should say:

"See, now, the plough is set, the furrow drawn, and the old life hidden
away; and who can make it any more the same? But Spring, little girl, is
surely coming, and even, after long months, harvest."

Down the path, across the fields, came Tommy, dangling a contented
catapult, and ruminating on the day's successes.

As he passed the ploughing he stopped, and gave a low whistle of
surprise--then guessed quickly enough what had happened. Madge lay
stretched out, face downwards, upon the black loam, and for a moment
Tommy stood perplexed.

Then he called, in a low voice, almost as he would have spoken in a
church:

"Madge, Madge."

But she did not move.

He knelt beside her, and some strange instinct bade him doff his cap.
Then he touched her shoulder and her black hair, with shy fingers.

"Madge," he called, again.

The child jumped to her feet, and tossing back her hair, looked at him
with half-frightened eyes.

He noticed that her cheeks were stained with the soft earth, and he saw
tears upon them.

Tommy had never willingly kissed anyone in his life--he had not known a
mother--but now, without thought or hesitation--almost without
consciousness, for he was still very much a child--he laid his arms
about her neck and kissed her cheek--once, twice.

But what he said to her only the great night, and the old plough, know.




XVII

IN WHICH TOMMY TAKES THE UPLAND ROAD


If I have not, so far, touched upon Tommy's religious life it is chiefly
for the reason that, to me, at this time, it was practically as a sealed
book.

Nor had I ever talked with him on these matters. And this for two
reasons--one of them being, no doubt, the natural hesitation of the
average Englishman to lay his hands upon the veil of his neighbour's
sanctuary, and one, a dawning doubt in my mind as to the capacity of my
own creed to meet the requirements of Tommy's nature. For, to me, at
this time, the idea of God was of One in some distant Olympus watching
His long-formulated laws work out their appointed end--a Being
infinitely beneficent, and revealed in all nature and beauty, but,
spiritually, entirely remote.

And my religion had been that of a reverent habit and a peaceable
moderation, and to live contented with my fellows.

But here was a boy put into my hands, with a future to be brought about,
and already at the outset I had seen a glimpse of the dangers besetting
his path, and the glimpse had, as I have already confessed, frightened
me not a little. Nor had my musings so far comforted me, but rather
shown me the lamentable weakness of my position. True, I could lay down
rules, and advise and warn, but the whole of Tommy's every word and
action showed me the powerlessness of such procedure.

And I dared not let things drift. The matter I felt sure should be
approached on religious grounds, and it was this conviction that
revealed to me my absolute impotence.

So far as I remembered, no great temptations had assailed me, no violent
passions had held me in thrall.

My life had been a smooth one, and of moral struggle and defeat I seemed
to know nothing. But that such would be Tommy's lot I felt doubtful, and
the doubt (it was almost a certainty) filled me with many
apprehensions.

So full was I of my musings that I had not noticed how in my walk I had
reached the doctor's garden.

The click of a cricket bat struck into my thoughts and brought me into
the warm afternoon again, with all its sweetness of scent and sound.

I could hear Tommy laughing, and as I drew back the bushes, I caught a
glimpse of the doctor coaching him in the right manipulation of the bat.

"I say, I never knew you played cricket, you know," said Tommy. "I
thought you were an awful ass at games, and all that sort of thing."

The doctor laughed.

"I'm jolly rusty at 'em, anyway," he said. "But I used to play a bit in
the old days."

Tommy continued to bat, and I lounged, unnoticed, upon the rails,
watching the practice.

Presently the doctor took a turn, and I, too, was surprised at his
evident mastery of the art, for I had long since disregarded him as a
sportsman.

Tommy's lobs were easy enough, and once the doctor drove a hot return
straight at his legs.

Tommy jumped out of the way, but the doctor called to him sharply:

"Field up," he said, and Tommy coloured.

Another return came straight and hard, but Tommy stooped and held it,
and the doctor dropped his bat.

"Good," I heard him say. "Stand up to 'em like a man--hurts a bit at the
time--but it saves heaps of trouble in the end, and--and the other
fellow doesn't score."

They were looking straight into each other's eyes, as man to man, and
after a pause the doctor spoke again, in a low voice. I could not hear
what he said, but Tommy's face was grave as he listened.

I sauntered on down the lane, and a few minutes later felt a hand on my
arm.

"Well, and what did you think of it?"

"Of what?"

"The boy's batting. I saw you watching."

"I am not an expert, but he'll do, won't he?"

"Yes--he'll do."

"I didn't know that you had kept up your cricket."

"I haven't. But I mean to revive it if I can. We--we must beat Borcombe
next time, you know."

We walked on in silence for a little, then.

"Tommy's main desire appears to be a cricketer just now," observed the
doctor.

"As it was to be a poacher, yesterday."

"Or a steam-roller driver, in the years gone by."

"And what, I wonder, to-morrow?"

The doctor was looking thoughtfully over the wide fields, red with
sunset.

"To-morrow? Ah, who knows?" He pointed to a pile of cumulus clouds,
marching magnificently in the southern sky, bright as Heaven, and
changeable as circumstance.

"A boy's dreams," he said. "A little while here and a little while
there, always changing but always tinged with a certain fleeting
magnificence."

"And never realised?"

"Oh, I don't know. I don't know. We most of us march and march to our
cloud mountain-tops, and, maybe, some of us at the day's end find a
little low-browed hill somewhere where our everlasting Alps had seemed
to stand."

"Surely you are a pessimist."

"Not at all. If we had not marched for the clouds, maybe we should never
have achieved the little hill."

"You would have Tommy march, then, for the clouds?"

The doctor laughed.

"He is an average boy. He will do that anyway. But I would have the true
light on the clouds, to which he lifts his eyes."

"Ah--if his face were set upon them now," I said half to myself.

On the road to the downs was a small figure.

"See," said my companion, "He is on the upland road. Let us take it as
an omen."

And we turned homeward.

Late into the night we talked, and I unfolded my fears for Tommy with a
fulness that was foreign to me.

And our talk drifted, as such conversation will, into many and intimate
matters, such as men rarely discuss between each other.

And in the end, as I rose to depart, the doctor held my hand.

"See, old friend," he said, "we are nearer to-night than ever for all
our seeming fundamental differences, and you will not mind what I have
to say.

"To you the idea of God is so great, so infinitely high, that the notion
of personal friendship with such an One would seem to be an almost
criminal impertinence, and the idea of His interference in our trivial
hum-drum lives a gross profanity.

"To me, a plain man, and not greatly read, this personal God, this
Friend Christ, is more than all else has to offer me.

"It is life's motive, and weapon, and solace, and joy. It is its light
and colour and its very _raison d'etre_. And I believe that for the
great majority of men this idea of the Divine, and this only, is
powerful enough to assure them real victory and moral strength.

"I grant you all the beauty, and majesty, and truth, of your ideal, but
I would no more dare to lay it before an average healthy, passionate man
alone than I would to send an army into battle--with a position to
take--unarmed and leaderless."

The doctor paused. Then:

"Forgive me," he said, "I don't often talk like this, but, believe me,
it is the knowledge of his God, as a strong, sympathetic, personal
friend, that Tommy needs--that most of us need--to ensure life's truest
success."

We shook hands again and parted.

"I am glad you have spoken," said I, "and thank you for your words."

       *       *       *       *       *

"A tramp--merely a tramp," said the stranger, puffing contentedly at his
pipe, on the winding road that led over the dim downs.

Tommy looked at him doubtfully.

He was very tall and broad, and clean, and his Norfolk suit was well
made and of stout tweed.

"You don't look much like one," he said.

The stranger laughed.

"For the matter of that no more do you," he observed.

"I'm not one," said Tommy.

The stranger smoked in silence for a little, and Tommy sat down beside
him on the grass.

"I'm not one," he repeated.

"Shakespeare says we are all players in a great drama, of which the
world is the stage, you know. I don't quite know if that's altogether
true, but I'm pretty sure that we're all of us tramps, going it with
more or less zest, it is true, and in different costumes--but tramps at
the last, every one of us."

Tommy looked at him with puzzled eyes.

"What a rum way of talking you have--something like the poet, only
different somehow."

"The poet?"

"Down there at Camslove."

"Ah, I remember. I read some of his things; pretty little rhymes, too,
if I remember rightly."

"They're jolly good," said Tommy, warmly.

"A friend of yours, eh?"

Tommy nodded.

"He wrote one just here, where we're sitting."

"Did he, by Jove--which was it?"

Tommy pondered.

"I forget most of it, but it was jolly good. He told it me one day on
the downs, just as we met a shepherd singing, and it was about life and
enterprise, and all that sort of thing, and love on the upland road
and--and God beyond the crest."

"Sounds good, and partly true."

"How do you mean; why isn't it altogether true?"

The stranger smoked a minute or two in silence, then:

"Where is the crest?" he asked.

Tommy pointed up into the twilight.

"It's a long way to the crest," he said.

"Ah--and the fellows who never get there?"

"I don't understand."

"If God be only beyond the crest, how shall they fare?"

Tommy was silent, looking away down the dusky valley.

He saw a light or two glimmering among the trees.

"It's time I went back," he muttered, but sat where he was.

"You see what I mean?" continued the stranger. "There is only one crest
worth striving for, and that is always beyond our reach, and God is
beyond it and above it, all right. But there's many a poor fellow who
would have his back to it now if he were not sure that God was also on
the upland road, among the tramps."

Tommy was silent, plucking uncomfortably at the grass.

"You haven't thought much about these things?"

"No."

"Ah, but you must, though. You see, until a fellow knows the road he is
on, he cannot achieve, nor even begin to surmount."

"How did you know the road you're on, then?"

"I had a friend."

"And he knew?"

"Yes, been over it all before, knew every turn, and all the steep
places. He has come with me. He is with me now."

Tommy peered up the darkening road.

"I can't see him," he said.

"Ah, but you will. I'm sure you will."

"What is his name?"

The stranger rose to his feet, and held out his hand.

"Christ," he said, as Tommy looked into his eyes. Then,

"Good-bye, old chap--meet again somewhere, perhaps--and, I say, about
the road, shall it be the upland road for both of us?"

Tommy was silent, then, as they shook hands.

"Yes," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Hullo, Tommy," said I, on my return that night, from the doctor's
study, "Enjoyed the evening?"

"Had some awful good practice with the doctor's bat."

"We saw you on the downs afterwards."

Tommy looked at me, with bright eyes, as if about to tell me something,
but he changed his mind.

"Yes," he said, "I met a stranger there."




XVIII

AND LAST


And so these brief sketches plucked here and there from the boyhood of
Tommy Wideawake, and patched unskilfully together, must be gathered up
and docketed as closed, even as the boyhood from which they have been
drawn.

Yet the story of Tommy Wideawake is still being written, where all may
read who have eyes for the strength, and godliness of a country squire's
life, and a hand for his stalwart grip.

On the occasion of Tommy's twenty-first birthday, there were, of course,
great rejoicings in Camslove, and a general gathering of the
country-side to the old Grange.

Tommy, in the course of a successful, if not eloquent speech, made some
extravagant remarks as to the debt he owed to his four friends, and
guardians--the poet, the vicar, the doctor, and myself.

Modesty forbids their repetition, and doubtless youthful enthusiasm
accounted for their absurdity.

One other he mentioned in his speech--a stranger whom, long ago, he had
met on the upland road.

Thus Tommy in his maiden speech.

Three years later he brought a bride to Camslove, and her name was
Madge, and the rest of us live on in much the old way, excepting of
course the poet, who, as a married man, affects a fine pity for us less
fortunate ones.

And yet we are not altogether the same men, I fancy, as in those days.

The vicar's house has become a perfect playground for the poet's
children, and my own is occasionally sadly mauled by certain
sacrilegious nephews, much to the annoyance of my man.

The doctor is president, and indeed the shining light of the village
cricket team, and we, at Camslove, flatter ourselves that we can put up
a very decent game.

So I lay aside my pen awhile and read what I have written, and as I
read I am glad that I am led from garden to valley, and stream, and
mill, and over the common, and up the windy down.

For if a boy's will be indeed the wind's will, let it be that of the
wind on the heath, which the gipsies breathe. And if the thoughts of a
boy be long, long thoughts, let them be born of earth, and air, and sun.

And his sins, since sin and sunlight are incompatible, must needs be
easy of correction.

And his faith, when of a sudden he shall find that there is God in all
these things, shall be so deep that not all the criticism of all the
schools shall be able to root it out of his heart.

And the moral, if you must needs hammer one out, would be this, that
soundness is more to be desired than scholarship, and that the heart of
boyhood is, by nature, nearer to God than that of later life.

But let him who would draw the veil aside, do so with tender hands.




TO THE EDITOR OF "THE OUTLOOK"
FOR PERMISSION TO REPRINT SUNDRY
VERSES THE AUTHORS THANKS ARE
DUE




TWO BOOKS VERY LIKE
TOMMY WIDEAWAKE

ARE

KENNETH GRAHAME'S

THE GOLDEN AGE

AND

DREAM DAYS

MR. RICHARD LEGALLIENNE:

"I can think of no truer praise of Mr. Kenneth Grahame's 'Golden Age'
than that it is worthy of being called 'A Child's Garden--of Prose.'"

MR. ISRAEL ZANGWILL:

"No more enjoyable interpretation of the child's mind has been accorded
us since Stevenson's 'Child's Garden of Verses.'"

MR. SWINBURNE:

"The art of writing adequately and acceptably about children is among
the rarest and most precious of arts.... 'The Golden Age' is one of the
few books which are well-nigh too praiseworthy for praise.... The fit
reader--and the 'fit' readers should be far from 'few'--finds himself a
child again while reading it. Immortality should be the reward....
Praise would be as superfluous as analysis would be impertinent."

THE NEW YORK TIMES SATURDAY REVIEW:

"In this province, the reconstruction of child life, Kenneth Grahame is
masterly. In fact we know of no one his equal."




The International STUDIO

An Illustrated Magazine of Arts and Crafts

Subscription, 35 cents per month, $3.50 per year

[Illustration]

Three Months' Trial Subscription, $1.00

It is the aim of "The International Studio" to treat of every Art and
Craft--Architecture, Sculpture, Painting, Ceramics, Metal, Glass,
Furniture, Decoration, Design, Bookbinding, Needlework, Gardening, etc.
Color supplements and every species of black-and-white reproduction
appear in each number. In fact this magazine authoritatively presents to
the reader the progress of the Arts and Crafts.

       *       *       *       *       *

JOHN LANE, _The Bodley Head_
67 Fifth Avenue, New York

       *       *       *       *       *





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Tommy Wideawake, by H. H. Bashford

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOMMY WIDEAWAKE ***

***** This file should be named 39802.txt or 39802.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/8/0/39802/

Produced by Annie R. McGuire. This book was produced from
scanned images of public domain material from the Google
Print archive.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
