The Project Gutenberg EBook of Farming with Dynamite, by 
E. I. du Pont de Nemours Powder Co.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Farming with Dynamite
       A Few Hints to Farmers

Author: E. I. du Pont de Nemours Powder Co.

Release Date: May 31, 2012 [EBook #39869]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FARMING WITH DYNAMITE ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Erica Pfister-Altschul, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









    _FARMING
    with_
    DYNAMITE

    _A few hints
    to_
    FARMERS

    [Illustration: DU PONT]

    ESTABLISHED 1802




Farming With Dynamite


    _SAVES_
        MONEY
        TIME
        LABOR

    _REMOVES_
        STUMPS
        BOULDERS
        HARD-PAN

    _ENSURES_
        NEW, RICH SOIL
        INCREASED ACREAGE
        EASY PLOWING
        BIGGER YIELDS

[Illustration: DU PONT]

E. I. DU PONT DE NEMOURS POWDER CO.

    ESTABLISHED 1802            WILMINGTON, DEL.


    COPYRIGHTED
    1910
    BY
    E. I. DU PONT DE NEMOURS POWDER CO.

    WILMINGTON, DEL.


    PRINTED BY
    THE LORD BALTIMORE PRESS
    BALTIMORE, MD.




WHAT IS DYNAMITE?


Some farmers have a wrong idea about dynamite.

They know it is a powerful explosive, and believe it is dangerous to
handle.

Dynamite _is_ very powerful, much more so than gunpowder, but is
actually safer to handle.

After more than a hundred years' experience in making and using
explosives, we can truthfully state that by following simple directions
with ordinary care, anyone can use our "Red Cross" Dynamite without
harm.

The purpose of this booklet is to tell you the wonderful value of the
use of "Red Cross" Dynamite on the farm.

If it interests you, as it surely will, and if you are progressive and
ambitious, write for a copy of our "Handbook of Explosives for Farmers,
Planters and Ranchers," which will be sent free of charge and which
tells just how to use "Red Cross" Dynamite safely and easily, and make
it the greatest aid to profitable farming.

We will be glad to correspond with you about any special requirements of
your farm, or give you any information you want. Write our nearest
office (see last page) and your letter will receive prompt, personal
attention.


Chief Uses of Dynamite on the Farm.

As farmers all over the country begin to understand the value of "Red
Cross" Dynamite in their work, they are constantly reporting new uses
for this powerful assistant.

The chief uses are mentioned below and are explained in detail further
on. Complete instructions are furnished in the "Handbook of Explosives
for Farmers, Planters and Ranchers."

    =Clearing Land of Stumps, Trees and Boulders,=
    =Breaking up Hard-Pan, Shale, or Clay Subsoils,=
    =Plowing,=
    =Planting and Cultivating Orchards,=
    =Digging Ditches, Post Holes, Wells and Reservoirs,=
    =Road-Making and Grading,=
    =Excavating Cellars and Foundation Trenches,=
    =Regenerating Old, Worn-out Farms.=


Clearing Land of Stumps, Boulders and Trees.

It is needless to tell you the advantages of clearing land.

The stump covered site of a former piece of woods, is, as you know, new,
rich soil that needs no fertilizer.

You also know that pulling stumps with a machine is the hardest kind of
work--liable to injure seriously your horses, and certain to require a
lot of work to get rid of the stump after pulling.

Then too, it leaves the field full of holes, that must be filled; and
plowing the hard packed soil around old roots is no joke.

If instead of pulling the stumps, you burn them out, the intense heat
required destroys the chief fertile elements of the soil all around the
fire. After all your hard work you will leave a burned field instead of
new, fertile soil.

You can dynamite all those stumps for about one-third the cost of
pulling and chopping them up.

The blast splits up the stump into firewood, removes all the dirt,
breaks all the main roots, and loosens the soil for yards around.

You can blast fifty stumps in the time it would take to pull and chop up
one or two.

One man can do all the work, if necessary.

After the stumps are all blasted out, you will have a new, rich field,
and easy to cultivate, requiring no fertilizer to yield bumper crops.

If you want to remove a whole tree, "Red Cross" Dynamite will lift it
bodily out of the ground, and it will usually fall with the wind. When
this is done, _there is no stump left to remove_.

Boulders, which you are now obliged to plow around, can be broken up
into easily handled blocks by a single blast.


What it Costs to Blast Out Stumps.

At the latest "Farming with Dynamite" demonstration, held under the
auspices of the Norfolk and Western Railroad, at Ivor, Va., on August
11, 1910, one and one-half acres, containing forty-six stumps were
cleared in one day, at an expense of $18.00, including labor, or an
average of 39 cents per stump.

Records kept by the Long Island Railroad, covering operations on their
Experimental Farm, showed that, including the wages of the men who did
the work, the cost of blasting out stumps averaged about 16 cents per
stump.

Records kept of the cost of this work in different sections of the
country show as follows:

  Locality and Kind of Stump.          Average       Average Cost
                                      Diameter.       Per Stump.

  =Southern=--
    Pine Stumps                      29 inches          $0.30

  =Pennsylvania=--
    Apple, Ash and Chestnut          34-1/2 inches        .56

  =Michigan=--
    White Pine, Maple and Birch      32 inches            .47

  =Minnesota=--
    Birch, Ash, Spruce and Pine      20 inches            .16

  =Illinois=--
    Oak, Walnut and Gum              30 inches            .53

  =Western=--
    Fir, Pine and Cedar              50 inches           1.13
    Redwood                           8 feet and over    2.00 and over

Records kept by Prof. A. J. McGuire, Superintendent Experimental Farm of
the University of Minnesota, show even lower costs.


Breaking Up Hard-Pan, Shale or Clay Soils.

This is probably the most important use of "Red Cross" Dynamite.

It is possible, although difficult and expensive, to clear land of
stumps and boulders in other ways, but it is not possible to break up
hard-pan, or clay subsoils, without the use of "Red Cross" Dynamite.

Land that has a waterproof subsoil is practically worthless, as it holds
the surface water in such quantities on level ground, that the roots of
trees and plants are rotted away; on hilly ground, it allows the surface
water to run off, thus preventing the storage of moisture, with the
result that vegetation dies quickly in hot weather. Such land can be
rendered fertile at once by blasting with "Red Cross" Dynamite. The
subsoil is completely broken up and the dry, dead top soil converted
into a rich loam for less than the amount of the taxes for a year or
two.

The following extract from the Topeka, Kansas, "Mail and Breeze" proves
the wonderful results of this use of dynamite:--

"A few years ago M. T. Williams bought a quarter section of land near
Medicine Lodge in Barber County, and, conceiving the same idea that
Ex-Governor Crawford and others have, used dynamite in dealing with a
hard subsoil. The land was overgrown with sunflowers and cockleburs and
would have been considered dear at $10 per acre. It was underlaid with a
hard subsoil that was almost impervious to water. Mr. Williams' idea was
to loosen this subsoil with dynamite. He bored holes in the earth some 3
feet deep and about 40 feet apart, and in each hole placed a part of a
stick of dynamite. The explosion of the dynamite loosened the hard
subsoil, and made a reservoir for the rains, which had formerly run off
the land nearly as fast as they fell. On this quarter there is now 100
acres of, perhaps, as fine alfalfa as can be found in the state. Mr.
Williams has refused $15,000 for the quarter and gathers a net income
from his alfalfa of from $30 to $35 per acre every year.

"Last season Mr. Williams proposed to the ladies of the Baptist church
that he would give them a load of hay, provided they would come out to
the place, shock the hay, load it on wagons and haul it to town. They
took him at his word and shocked and hauled to town two tons which sold
for $16. When the second crop was ready the ladies came again, and
'touched' Mr. Williams for a little more than two tons which sold as
well as the first load."


Plowing With Dynamite.

Ordinarily plowing merely turns over the same old soil year after year,
and constant decrease in crops is only prevented by rotation or
expensive fertilizing.

With "Red Cross" Dynamite you can break up the ground all over the field
to a depth of two or three feet, for less than the cost of adequate
fertilizing, and with better results. Fertilizing only improves the top
soil. Dynamiting renders available all the moisture and elements of
growth throughout the entire depth of the blast.

In an article by J. H. Caldwell, of Spartanburg, S. C., in the
September, 1910, Technical World Magazine, he states that before the
ground was broken up with dynamite, he planted his corn with stalks 18
inches apart in rows 4 feet apart and raised 90 bushels to the acre.
After the ground was blasted, it was able to nourish stalks 6 inches
apart in rows the same distance apart, and to produce over 250 bushels
to the acre. This means an increase of about _160 bushels to the acre_,
every year, for an original expense of $40 an acre for labor and
explosives.

F. G. Moughon, of Walton County, Georgia, reports that he has been
raising crops of watermelons, weighing from 50 to 60 pounds each, on
land blasted by exploding charges of about 3 ounces of dynamite in holes
2-1/2 to 3 feet deep, spaced 8 to 10 feet apart.


Planting and Cultivating Orchards.

In the orchard "Red Cross" Dynamite not only saves much labor and time
in planting the trees, but ensures the best growth and large yields.

A man will spend an hour digging a tree hole that dynamite will excavate
in an instant. The spaded hole will be hard all the way down, making it
difficult for the transplanted roots to take hold. This is one of the
chief reasons why transplanted trees so often die.

"Red Cross" Dynamite not only excavates the required hole, but also
loosens the ground for yards around, killing all grubs, and forming a
spongy reservoir for moisture. That is why trees planted in dynamited
holes live and thrive.

A whole row of tree holes can be excavated in one instant when charged
with "Red Cross" Dynamite.

Old trees are benefited by exploding small charges under them, or
between the rows. This keeps the ground loose, and free from grubs.

A well known fruit grower reports that he planted peach trees some years
ago to determine whether anything was to be gained by using dynamite.
A number of trees were planted in holes by detonating a charge of
explosives to make the holes, and others were planted in holes of the
regulation size, dug by hand. Three years later the trees planted in the
blasted holes were strong and healthy, each producing between five and
six bushels of very fine peaches. The other trees planted on the same
ground without blasting, bore no peaches, both fruit and leaves having
shriveled up and dropped off during the dry season.


Digging Ditches, Post Holes, Wells and Reservoirs.

Excavating of any kind is slow, hard work when done with pick and
shovel, especially in mixed ground containing large stones, roots,
streaks of gravel or shale.

Several rods of ditch can be excavated in an instant with dynamite,
varying the size of each charge according to the nature of the ground at
that point.

Most of the dirt is thrown out by the blast and the remainder is broken
up ready for the shovel.

A Missourian advises us of a ditch he has just blasted through a swamp
for $100, which he says would have cost him $500 if dug in the usual
way.

On August 11, 1910, at the demonstration at Ivor, Va., above referred
to, a ditch 85 feet in length, 3 feet deep and 4-1/2 feet wide at the
top, was blasted with dynamite, at a cost not exceeding 10 cents per
yard, or about $2.75 for the entire work.

"Red Cross" Dynamite is especially useful in excavating wells and
reservoirs, as it opens up all the springs in nearby ground.


Road-Making and Grading.

"Red Cross" Dynamite is a big saver of time and labor in making new
roads, or leveling grades on old roads. Rock, shale, clay, gravel or
sand, can all be broken up with ease, simply by varying the charge
according to the nature of the ground and the depth of excavation
desired.


Excavating Cellars and Foundation Trenches.

This work can be done with "Red Cross" Dynamite in one-tenth the time
required for hand and team shoveling, and the cost of the dynamite is
but a fraction of the value of the labor saved.


Regenerating Old, Worn-Out Farms.

All over the Eastern and Southern sections of the United States are
farms and plantations, once rich, fertile and profitable, but now either
abandoned, or so unproductive as to be almost worthless.

The chief trouble with these farms is that the top soil is worked out.

"Red Cross" Dynamite can be used with complete success to turn up an
entirely fresh, fertile soil, and convert a $10 an acre "worked-out
farm" into land worth $50 to $100 an acre.

The cost in dynamite for this conversion would be about $10 to $15 an
acre according to the nature of the soil.

This matter is worthy of as much consideration on the part of farmers,
and all others concerned with national resources, as the reclamation of
desert areas in the West.

Surely it is as important to restore the productiveness of established
farms in the East, as it is to open up new, fertile fields in the West
and Southwest.

If any portion of your farm is not productive, it is probable that "Red
Cross" Dynamite can make it productive.

The leading railroads of the country are taking the greatest interest in
the increasing use of dynamite on the farm, because they know by actual
results that it means more and better crops, bigger shipments and
greater prosperity all along their lines.

Mr. H. B. Fullerton, Director Agricultural Development of the Long
Island Railroad, is one of the pioneers in this movement, and in an
article entitled "Reclaiming Waste Land on Long Island," his wife, Edith
Loring Fullerton, graphically describes the use of dynamite in the
preparation of waste land for cultivation.


How Can We Help You?

For more than a hundred years we have been making and selling
explosives. We maintain a highly skilled corps of chemists, explosive
specialists, and field representatives, whose sole duties are to study
conditions and devise means for handling them.

If there is any soil condition on your farm that we have not mentioned,
and which you think might be remedied or improved by dynamite, please
write us all about it. There will be no charge for the information we
will send you; in fact, we will be much obliged to you for giving us the
opportunity to study any peculiar condition.

Bear in mind that the age, reputation and high standing of this Company
are ample assurance that any statements made by us are conservative, and
based on long and varied experience.

In any case we want you to write for our "Handbook of Explosives for
Farmers, Planters and Ranchers," which we send out only on request, as
it is too valuable to send to anyone not interested enough to ask for
it. Asking for it puts you under no obligation to us except to read it.

We believe that when you have read it you will understand how simple,
safe and economical the use of "Red Cross" Dynamite is, and that you
will find many ways to save and make money with its aid.

    E. I. DU PONT DE NEMOURS POWDER CO.
    WILMINGTON, DELAWARE
    November, 1910




E. I. DU PONT DE NEMOURS POWDER COMPANY

HOME OFFICE: WILMINGTON, DEL.

ESTABLISHED 1802


_BRANCH OFFICES_

    BOSTON, MASS.
    BIRMINGHAM, ALA.
    BUFFALO, N.Y.
    CHICAGO, ILL.
    CINCINNATI, O.
    CITY OF MEXICO
    DENVER, COLO.
    DULUTH, MINN.
    HAZLETON, PA.
    HOUGHTON, MICH.
    HUNTINGTON, W. VA.
    JOPLIN, MO.
    KANSAS CITY, MO.
    MEMPHIS, TENN.
    NASHVILLE, TENN.
    NEW ORLEANS, LA.
    NEW YORK, N.Y.
    PHILADELPHIA, PA.
    PITTSBURG, KAS.
    PITTSBURGH, PA.
    PORTLAND, ORE.
    SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH
    SAN FRANCISCO, CAL.
    SCRANTON, PA.
    SEATTLE, WASH.
    SHREVEPORT, LA.
    SPOKANE, WASH.
    SPRINGFIELD, ILL.
    ST. LOUIS, MO.
    TERRE HAUTE, IND.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Farming with Dynamite, by 
E. I. du Pont de Nemours Powder Co.

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FARMING WITH DYNAMITE ***

***** This file should be named 39869.txt or 39869.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/8/6/39869/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Erica Pfister-Altschul, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

