Project Gutenberg's Thirty Days in Lithuania in 1919, by Peter P. Saurusaitis

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Thirty Days in Lithuania in 1919

Author: Peter P. Saurusaitis

Release Date: June 1, 2012 [EBook #39888]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THIRTY DAYS IN LITHUANIA IN 1919 ***




Produced by David Starner, Martin Pettit and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Thirty Days in

LITHUANIA

in 1919

REV. PETER P. SAURUSAITIS

Being an Account of Personal Experiences and
Observations Encountered in a Trip extending
from August 30, 1919, to February 16, 1920

Printed by Call Printing Company
EAST ST. LOUIS, ILLINOIS
1920




Exodium for All Americans


I hope the American people will be interested with the information I
have just brought from my native country. I am writing the story of my
trip to Lithuania and return at the suggestion of some of my fellow
citizens, to whom I have narrated some ideas of it, in which they took
much interest as instructive information for anyone who prepares for a
trip to any part of the world. As this country is composed of citizens
and patriots of all nationalities, so every citizen may get attraction
to visit his native land; and even those who are born in this country
are sometimes tempted to visit the country of their fathers and
forefathers.




Exodium for Waterbury, Conn., Citizens Only.


My Dear Friends and Fellow Citizens:

I am glad to be with you again. Why am I glad? Because of the thirty-six
years since I came to America, most of the time I have spent in
Waterbury. Here I have lived for twenty-one years. Because in Waterbury
I had time enough to make many friends, and if I did not do so, it is my
own fault. In a word, in Waterbury my adopted citizenship must have
rooted much deeper than in the other parts of the United States in which
I have lived for a much shorter time.




What I Saw in Lithuania


No matter how zealous patriots we may become in our adopted country, we
should not forget altogether our native country. As I did not venture to
visit Lithuania under the czar in 1910, when I was visiting other parts
of Europe, I had a great desire to see my native land after the horrible
war. Anyone would be anxious to visit his native country after
thirty-six years' absence.

It was not an easy task for me to get a passport, as the United States
government objected to letting me cross Germany. There being no American
consul to Germany, our government would not take the responsibility of
protecting me in that country. To avoid crossing Germany I was advised
to ask for a passport through Denmark, Switzerland and Libow, which I
did. But the consul at Denmark refused to put the visa on my passport
unless I would send a cable to Denmark and get the consent of the
government. I went to Washington to see the ambassador of Denmark
personally, and he told me the same as the consul in New York. I then
went to the State Department asking to have a change made in my
passport which would permit me to go through France. This the State
Department refused to do. Finally I went to Mr. Walsh, the Senator from
Massachusetts, who sent his secretary with me to the State Department,
and the change was made immediately. I then went to the French
ambassador who put his visa on my passport, and I was ready to go by way
of France. It took me about two months to get the passport.

On August 30th, 1919, I embarked from New York, West Fourteenth Street,
on the ship Transatlantique La Lorraine, to Havre, France. The second
night of my trip was very foggy. Our ship sounded fog horns all night. I
felt that the ship was standing still and went on deck to see what had
happened. I saw lights flashing in two places, as if two ships were
sinking not far from each other. On making inquiry from the sailors I
found that our ship had collided with a fishing boat from Canada,
cutting it in two. Fortunately all the fishermen were saved by our ship.
I saw them struggling in their small boats against the waves near our
ship, till they came close and the ropes were let down, by means of
which their small boats were pulled up to our ship and the men were
saved. Next day a collection for the fishermen was taken up among our
passengers which amounted to 3000 francs, and they were carried to
Havre.

All the voyage to France was very stormy except one day at the beginning
and one day near France. Eight days' trip from New York to Havre. Sunday
night about eight o'clock we reached Havre, but we were obliged to sleep
on the ship because Monday morning the inspectors came to examine all
passports and luggage. It was after one o'clock in the afternoon when I
reached Paris, where I called at the Lithuanian Legation to get
directions for going by way of Switzerland and Libow to Lithuania. They
directed me to cross Germany, assuring me that two Lithuanian priests
just before me had crossed Germany without any trouble. They were
ignorant of the fact that one of those priests lost in Germany two suit
cases valued at about five hundred dollars. This priest told me this
later, when I met him in Lithuania.

After remaining in Paris for three days, trusting the advice of the
Lithuanian Legation, having seen all authorities of France and England,
I started for Lithuania by way of Belgium, Cologne, Berlin, Eytkunen, to
the first station of Lithuania, called Valkaviskis. My baggage was
addressed by the same route and was carried on the same train. The train
left Paris at 9:30 P. M. I had a chance to see some of the ruined cities
of Belgium only in the morning--at night there was no possibility of
seeing. When we came to the first station in Germany, Herbesthal, the
German inspector of passports and baggage came to examine all trunks. I
was told that the train would wait there at the station till all the
trunks were carried back to the baggage room and the same train would
carry them together with the passengers. But it was just to the
contrary. When I returned from the station after unlocking and locking
my trunk the train was gone, and my trunk was left in Herbesthal and my
two suit cases were carried away to Cologne. I was obliged to take
another train to Cologne. On the first train we were supposed to arrive
in Cologne about 11:00 a. m.; on the second train we did not arrive
until very near four p. m. I was afraid of losing both my suit case,
portable altar and the trunk. The suit case and the portable altar I
found in Cologne, with the help of the British soldiers, but my trunk,
worth about five hundred dollars, is lost forever in Germany.

In Cologne I tried in vain to get breakfast about 4:30 p. m. If you do
not drink beer you can get nothing to eat. Those who drink beer get some
herrings without bread. Bread you get only once a day--two small thin
slices, for supper. There are no dining rooms on the trains any more in
Germany.

At 9:30 p. m. the train left Cologne for Berlin. Near Berlin the
British inspector of passports told me: "I allow you this time to pass
this way to Lithuania if you promise me not to return to America the
same way." I said: "I will return by way of Libow." At 8:30 a. m. the
train arrived in Berlin and left for Koenigsberg and Eytkunen at 9:30 p.
m. The evening trip from Berlin was a regular torture to me which I
shall never forget. It seems to me that on that evening there must have
been some sort of revolution among the German parties. No matter what
the classification of the ticket of any passenger, whether first,
second, third or fourth class, there was no distinction in the service
on the train. There was such a multitude of people flocking to the
train, the stronger ones trampling over the weaker--especially the
women. Even after the train was filled there were many left to stand and
wait for another train. I had a second class ticket and was obliged to
sit in the corridor on my suit case all night and the greater part of
the day.

On the train were many armed German soldiers going to Latvia and a part
of Lithuania. I heard them talking about Littau and Mittau Shauliai.
After we passed Koeningsburg near the Eytkunen limit of Lithuania, some
persons, one of them in the uniform of a soldier, began to speak the
Lithuanian language. I asked them who they were and they told me they
were Lithuanian officials returning from Berlin.

As soon as we arrived at Eytkunen, the German inspector asked to see our
passports, and seeing on mine no visa by the German authority, I was
told to return to Berlin for the necessary signature. I informed him
that the consul of Switzerland in New York put the visa on my passport,
permitting me to cross Germany. This was not sufficient as the Swiss
consul had lost this authority at the termination of the war.
Fortunately the Lithuanians whom I met at Eytkunen appealed to the Mayor
of Virbalis, a city of Lithuania, who came to Eytkunen and obtained my
release.

What a joy it was when a German soldier came to me while I was
preparing to return to Berlin and told me to proceed to Lithuania. He
led me to the train leaving for Vilkaviskis.

I was very anxious to see that part of the country for I was well
acquainted with it thirty-six years ago. I saw that Lithuania is more
devastated than Belgium. The Germans crossed through Belgium once only,
while Lithuania had been the regular battlefield for the German and
Russian armies. It was alternately captured and recaptured by the
contending armies. When the Russian army was fleeing it destroyed
whatever opportunity afforded, likewise the German army in its retreat
carried everything in its wake, pillaged, burned and destroyed whatever
it could not take. I noticed in particular one village which had been,
only a few trees were visible. Numerous farm houses had been destroyed
and burned to the ground. People now live in huts made partly of straw,
old boards and clay. Not only the war, but nature has made changes in
Lithuania. Rivers, such as the Seimena and Sirvinta, are only brooks. As
we approached Vilkaviskis, my native town, the passengers called my
attention to the station. My imagination failed to picture the rudely
constructed hut as the same station of former years, which had been
entirely destroyed by the invading army.

When I descended from the train, my sister's son-in-law, whom I had seen
in Germany ten years ago, recognized me and conducted me to his home
nearby. After spending a few happy hours with my friends and relatives I
proceeded to the rectory. The next morning I was fortunate indeed to say
mass for the first time in the church in which I was baptized. That
afternoon at a meeting of the Lithuanian Sales Corporation, I lectured
on American Lithuanians and Americans in general. Monday I went to
Kaunas, or Kovno, to meet the [A]President of Lithuania, Anthony
Smetona, to extend to him the congratulations of the Lithuanian Total
Abstinance Organization of America.

[Footnote A: When I presented to the president of Lithuania, Mr. Anthony
Smetona, the said recommendation of the Lithuanian Total Abstinance
Organization in America, which is indeed a suggestion to introduce the
prohibition of the manufacture and sale of intoxicating drinks in
Lithuania--in other words, to imitate the American government in this
respect, he expressed himself sufficiently in favor of it, but it is
quite self-evident that he, as the President of Lithuania alone, cannot
accomplish it. In our conversation he made a suggestion to me that I
should strive to get a chance to speak publicly in Kaunas and in other
places as much as possible on the subject of total abstinance, to which
I expressed my hope that some of the priests of Kaunas, no doubt, would
give me a chance there. Then the President said to me: "I have read in
the Lithuanian American newspapers so much of you as the apostle of
total abstinance among Lithuanians in America, I wish you would do the
same here." In Lithuania the opportunity to speak to the people is
offered only on Sunday, and in that case it is better in the church. So
I had an opportunity on Sundays and delivered sermons in seven churches.
In one a good number of priests as guests were assembled and listened to
my sermon. They were pleased and at dinner table were discussing about
American prohibition. A great many of them are boldly opposed to it;
some even expressing their doubt about total abstinance. But they all
were curious to know what those Lithuanians will do who were arrested
and punished for manufacturing at home and selling intoxicants without
the license of the government, after hearing of that sermon in the
church. Lithuanians in Lithuania have learned from the Germans when they
were in occupation, not only how to make intoxicants, but also soap,
sugar, etc.

At first I considered it might be an insult to speak about total
abstinance in Lithuania, after the horrible war; that those people could
not get any attraction to intoxicants having witnessed such horrors of
the war. But I was soon informed by some good souls of the necessity of
total abstinance and of the dangers and temptations of many to
intoxication. So I could not part with Lithuania without making an
effort to sow the seed that might produce some good effects in the field
of total abstinance.

As soon as I came to Boston and Worcester the Lithuanian Total
Abstinance Central Committee held its quarter-annual convention and
caught me unexpectedly and cross-examined me on the situation in
Lithuania. I was obliged to give an account of all I had done in
Lithuania for total abstinance and prohibition. I told them that the
President alone could not introduce prohibition, and that they will wait
until a general convention of Lithuanians will take place. Then they
appointed me to write to the President for an official answer to their
communication, and that I should strive to find some way by which the
Total Abstinance Organization of America could unite in co-operation
with the same organization in Lithuania. So I undertook to do so, and am
trying now to perform my obligation, but at present the correspondence
with Lithuania is very slow.]

The President of Lithuania was very thankful to the Americans and
Lithuanians for the help they so generously extended to alleviate the
sufferings of the people committed to his care. I visited the
institution for teachers, called "Saules Namai", the Home of the Sun,
which was almost miraculously saved from the devastations of war. While
speaking of this institution I must also say a few words about the vast
difference in spirit of the Lithuanians of the past and present. In
former years the parents were free to send or not to send their children
to school under the regime of the Czar. Few parents grasped this
opportunity for they despised education, saying our forefathers were
very good people without education, so we and our children will remain
without it. I was very much surprised to see the spirit among the
Lithuanians today. The young and old are eager to learn, to educate, to
build schools and institutions of learning. The larger cities have
gymnasiums or higher schools for girls and boys. They are creating new
organizations to support these institutions and are exerting to the
utmost to preserve them.


The Spirit of Patriotism

I would not dare to undertake to describe to you the spirit of
patriotism of the Lithuanians in their native land, for I am a
Lithuanian, and some may say that it is quite natural to praise one's
own. But what I have heard from their enemies, the Germans, would seem
to be legitimate. Even they are amazed to see the patriotic spirit of
the Lithuanians, especially young boys eighteen and nineteen years of
age who are so anxious to defend their liberty. They are presenting
themselves in great numbers to the officials of the present government
to be enrolled in the army, but for the lack of ammunition and clothing
great numbers are turned away. In my conversation with some of these
soldiers I asked them if they really thought they could defend their
country from the yoke of their oppressors. Their answer was: "We will
not submit to any yoke; we know well that our fathers and forefathers
suffered for so many centuries, and we in turn shall defend our liberty
to the last drop of blood." One of these soldiers was preparing to
return to war against the Kolchakians and Germans, to expel them from
the city called Siauliai, which they had lately occupied. After
repulsing the Bolshevik from the Dvinsk, they had a few weeks' rest and
then marched to Kaunas.

At the time I was visiting Lithuania she was surrounded by enemies--on
the north and east by the Bolsheviks, on the west by Kolchak and the
insurgent Germans, and on the south by the Poles. The most stupendous
fact is that at present the Poles are the most dangerous foes of the
Lithuanians. The Poles, rejoicing in their own liberation from the yoke
of oppression, are altogether unmindful that they are striving to place
the Lithuanian nation under worse oppression. When the Germans occupied
Lithuania they did not treat them as roughly as the Poles are doing at
this moment. For example, I was in Lithuania when the Poles took Seinai,
the seat of Bishop Karosas, which is a Lithuanian city, imprisoned the
Lithuanian Bishop in his residence, expelled the ecclesiastical students
from their seminary, arrested two priests and carried them to Poland. If
any of the remaining priests are called out on a sick call, they send
armed soldiers to accompany the priest and guard his movements strictly.
They did not permit the Bishop to correspond with his pastors, or the
priests of the diocese, nor was anyone permitted to call on him. The
Germans during their occupation never guarded a priest going to sick
calls.

Here is a translation of a little article taken from a Lithuanian
political daily newspaper called Lietuva (Lithuania) of October 10,
1919:

"Actions of the Polish Occupants.--The Polish army came to the district
of Vilkaviskis in September. After two weeks they began to show their
rapacity. They robbed Augustin Kliogutis of Norvydai while he was going
home from church, with five other companions, stripped them of their
clothing and left them in puris naturalibus."

Similar notices filled the paper with the various robberies committed
by soldiers of the Polish army. On September 21, 1919, one of the Polish
officials called the Lithuanian people together and promised them great
favors--while the people asked him to stop the robberies, which would
have been the greatest favor possible. The Lithuanians say: "If the
Poles could grant us favors they would not keep their soldiers half
naked and half starved."

For all this greediness and avariciousness of the Polish people I do not
blame the good Polish citizens and patriots, because in our days in all
nationalities there are a great many political parties, of which the
governments are composed, the greater number of those compelling the
entire nation to act against the good will of the citizens. On the other
hand we Lithuanians cannot boast too much of our patriotism, as though
we had no traitor, even among the Poles. There are many Polonized
Lithuanians, or so-called Poles who by the familiar and long intercourse
with the Polish race, gradually neglected and despised and finally
rejected entirely the Lithuanian language, adopted the Polish language
in such a manner that some of them do not acknowledge to be Lithuanians
but claim to be of Polish descendency--in other words, Polish by birth.
These are the greatest persecutors of the Lithuanians now. This is the
principal reason why the Poles took possession of Vilna, the first
capitol of Lithuania. They maintain that all the province of Vilna is
purely Polish. In this way the Polish patriots, joined by the Polonized
Lithuanian renegades and traitors, try to induce others to join their
party, and to struggle to find the demarkation between the two countries
would appear endless without the final decision of the allies.

It is true what the Rev. Laukaitis remarked in his speech, that the
Poles are carrying on their propaganda to induce more of the Lithuanian
farmers, ignorant enough, to sign the Polish alliance. They send their
crafty speakers to the villages near the boundary trying to persuade the
Lithuanian government to permit a ballot to be cast in Vilna as to
which side they prefer to belong. These propagandists do not tell the
truth. They, like the Bolsheviks, promise mountains of gold, and in the
end give bitter sorrow. It would indeed be foolish to allow a ballot
after these speakers obtain the signatures of the farmers, who, through
their ignorance, are misled by the vain promises and misleading
arguments that the Lithuanians are incapable of self-government, without
first hearing our side. With such arguments it would take only a few
months to lead astray all the Lithuanians or vice versa Lithuanian
speakers could bring to our side all Poles.

Members of the British mission at Kaunas (Kovo) told me that the
Lithuanians are very brave soldiers who have so many enemies, yet
nevertheless keep their spirit of patriotism so long and so firmly. It
stands to reason then, that the Lithuanians, as a nation, are very
brave, considering the numbers of Poles and Lithuanians, you could
hardly imagine how the Lithuanians could dare oppose the Poles, and yet
you see they attempt to oppose many armies. Lithuania has about
one-fifth the population of Poland in Europe and about one-third the
population of the Poles in America.

While I was spending five days in Kaunas, the temporary capital of
Lithuania, the President received a cable from Lloyd George, London,
recognizing the independence of Lithuania. This was on the night of
September 26th. As soon as the cable arrived the Lithuanian government
had the greatest demonstration in the history of the nation, wholly
unmindful of the weather and rain. Parades, speeches, and the wildest
rejoicing for this newly realized dream took possession of the city.

I intended to remain in Lithuania until May, but was obliged to change
my mind for more than one reason. My winter apparel was in the lost
baggage in Germany and the cold weather was approaching rapidly. There
was no possibility for me to visit all the Parish churches as intended.
There was no means of travel, train or vehicle. During the war the
Lithuanians were deprived of all their horses. Those which they have now
are used on the farms. With the greatest difficulty I managed to visit
the following: Kybartai, Virbalis, Alvitas, Lankeliskiai, Valkaviskis,
Gizai, Marjampole, Kaunas, and Kamendulai. I did not get the opportunity
to see the Bishop of Vilona; for there was no consul of Poland in
Lithuania to sign my passport. I spoke with the suffragan of the bishop
of Kaunas. The Bishop of Seinai was arrested by the Poles. The last and
to me the most important reason why I was determined to return to
America immediately was because of the bad treatment the Lithuanian
Bishops, priests and ecclesiastical students received in Seinai. I
resolved to return to appeal to the sympathetic hearts of the Americans
to protest against the wrong-doings of the Poles.

After visiting the above mentioned places, I decided to find out when
and how I could get a ship from England to New York. I went to Kaunas a
second time, as I was advised that I should telephone to Libow for
information with regard to sailings of English ships--so as to know how
long I could remain in Lithuania.

At Kaunas I learned that the Germans and Kolchakians had taken Siauliai,
a city between Kaunas and Libow, and that I could not go back to America
by way of Libow. The telephone was interrupted by the occupants. Then
there was no way left to me but to go to the English mission at Kaunas
to get a permit to go back via Germany, and to go to the German consul
at Kaunas to put a visa on my passport for the same purpose. Having
obtained all the documents I said adieu to Kaunas, adieu Lithuania,
adieu Vilkaviskis, adieu my sister and all her family. On October 16 I
took the German train from Eytkunen to Berlin and Cologne. In Cologne I
remained three days, making investigation for my lost baggage, but in
vain. Via Brussells to Ostend, where I embarked on the four hours vessel
from Ostend to Dower, an English port. On October 23 I came to London
at 9:30 p. m. There I was obliged to spend all night walking up and down
the front of the church to avoid catching cold, because there was no
possibility of getting a place in any of the hotels. Next morning the
first thing I went to find out how soon I could get the ship Mauretania.
I was informed that it was not sure if the Mauretania would be able to
start for New York on December 30, because it was in repair. There were
some smaller ships to start sooner, which I did not risk. In Scotland
two Lithuanian priests who were informed of my coming to London and
would not be able to get a ship to America for a long time, invited me
to Scotland to give mission to the Lithuanians there. Having consented
to do so, I came to Glasgow November 5. In the following places I gave
mission of four days each: Graigneuk, Motherwell, Garfin, Burnbank; and
a whole week in each of the following places: Mossend and Glasgow. I
also spent one week at Manchester in England. The missions were very
successful in all places. The Lithuanians were rejoicing and saying that
my not getting a ship was very providential. On December 21, I came back
to London and bought my ticket to cross the ocean on the Canadian ship
called Empress of France, which was to start January 3, 1920. On
December 24 I came to Liverpool to spend a few days there in getting
ready for my voyage to Canada and the United States. On coming to
Liverpool, I learned that the "Empress of France" was to start four days
later, than was intended, on January 7th.

The Lithuanian people of Liverpool asked me to give a Mission to them.
On the Sunday after Christmas I opened a mission for the Lithuanians of
Liverpool, and closed it the next Sunday.

On Wednesday, January 7th, I embarked on the ship for St. John, Canada.
The "Empress of France" claims to make her trip in six days, but in
rough weather it took us fully eight days, so it was January 15th, about
7:30 p. m., we arrived in St. John, Canada. Next morning, after
examining our passports and trunks, we landed. There was no train to
Boston, Mass., till 7:30 p. m. I arrived at Boston January 17th, just a
few minutes before 12 o'clock a. m.


The Object of This Lecture.

Some one may inquire of me, what I wish the Americans to do for
Lithuania?

All small nations of the world, so far, had the greatest confidence in
the +League of Nations+, which promised to all equal liberty of existence
and self-determination, toleration of its language, etc. The principal
characteristic of any nation is the language of that nation. If the
native language is forbidden to any nation by those becoming its
conquerors, the nation is exterminated.

All the enemies of Lithuania seem to be very anxious to deprive the
people of their language, for as soon as they take possession of some of
the Lithuanian cities or towns, the first step they take is to forbid
the children to be taught the Lithuanian language. Now, with all the
smaller nations of the world, Lithuanians are crying: "Where is Justice?
Why are our enemies so anxious to deprive us of our language? In what
respect is our enemies' language better than our own? Is it our fault
that we are born of Lithuanian parents and speak Lithuanian language?"

Philologists are demonstrating that the Lithuanian language, of all
European languages, is the nearest to Sanscrit. All educated people are
glad to know that there is some nation in existence using the oldest of
speaking tongues. Why is it that, in our days, people who claim to be
very highly educated are attempting to exterminate the nation which is
using the oldest language? Nothing but envy, greed and grab!

Now, as the +League or Nations+ is gradually dying, so all hope of
preserving the Lithuanian nation, together with its language, is
diminishing.

Some people maintain that the +League of Nations+ is diametrically opposed
to the will of God, expressed in the prophesies of the Bible; that there
will be no end of wars to the very end of the world. But we know,
positively, that God does not want wars; that God wants peace. We know
very well that all the causes of the wars are to be found in the
iniquities of men--in the seven capital sins. If not all the prophesies
of the Bible, at least a great many can be explained conditionally. If
people mend their behaviour, the punishments, which have been foretold
for their crimes, will not take place, because the nature itself, which
has been so directed by the Creator to punish man for deviating from the
order, is changed by man's actions. In fact, some of the prophesies of
the Old Testament we could not explain, save in this way. If all people
would strive to stop the wars, the +League of Nations+ would become the
means of bringing universal peace on earth, according to the will of the
Almighty. I wish the American people would study this question as
closely as possible, and bring all nations to everlasting peace.

We can plainly see, from the following text of the Bible, that God wants
all people to live in peace always: "But if one strike thee on thy right
cheek, turn to him also the other. * * * And if any man will contend
with thee in judgment, and take away thy coat, let go thy cloak also
unto him."--Matt. v. 40. God could never have said this, unless He
foresaw the possibility of lasting peace among all men and all nations
in this world.

Just imagine, if all people and all nations in this world were readily
prepared to turn their other cheek to the one who is ready to strike you
on your right cheek. It is self evident there would be none to strike
his neighbor on his right cheek. And if everybody in the world would be
ready to let go his cloak to one who is ready to take away his coat,
there would be none to deprive any one of his coat. As long as we
believe that Jesus Christ, who said these words, is true God and true
man; as long as we know that every man has free will, and can do what he
pleases, so long is this principle possible to every man. Even to those
people who do not believe in the divinity of Jesus Christ, this
principle could be explained as a natural law: Do not do unto others
what you do not want others to do unto you; do unto others what you wish
others to do unto you. If all intelligent people, together with those
who are aspiring to a higher education, would strive to organize a
league to educate all people in this particular principle, there would
be no doubt of its success, because no people would desire to have
another war. Everybody knows that war does no good to any one; and that
another war would be ten times worse than the one we have had. I do not
see why the +League of Nations+ or another similar reorganized regulation
of nations, should not attract all nations to a union of such principles
as these.

The objector insists: "I do not mean that the +League of Nations+ is
opposed to the will of God, as if God wanted wars, but God, foreseeing
the wickedness of men, prophesied that there will be no peace among men
to the end of the world."

It is sufficient to us to know that God does not want war, that God
wants peace; or, in other words, to know God's will, and to strive to do
it. As long as we know that either the +League of Nations+ or other
international organization is in accordance to the will of God--who is
striving to induce all nations to prevent wars in future--just as God
wants all people to live in peace always--so we ought to strive, by word
and example, to induce all nations to hate wars and live in peace. As
every human being has a right to existence, so every family and every
nation has a right to exist and use its own language, etc. No one has
the right to destroy small nations because they are too small to govern
themselves. For the very reason, if there be no more wars, if the +League
of Nations+ is to be sincere in every respect, to reject all greediness,
which is the cause of wars, there would be no more necessity of
greatness to be able to defend against foes. Just as every family is
capable of governing itself, so the smallest nation can govern itself.

So far the League of Nations does not produce its desired effect,
because there is no confidence in some nations in one another. One
nation does not trust the other. It is a new branch of science. It
requires a good deal of study--and study by all nations and all
persons--until some one may discover the means to induce the desired
confidence satisfactory for all nations. I hope Americans will make the
greatest progress in this line, as in everything else.

My opinion is that all nations could be induced to trust one another, if
the above principle of natural law would be plainly explained, either in
all languages or in +Aspiranto+ language. If all representatives of all
nations would sign the agreement, then the danger would be removed far
away. If it is so difficult to induce one nation to trust the other
nation to join the League, how can you expect any small nation to be
inspired with any confidence when it is annexed to another greater
nation by force? No matter how long it will be annexed, it will seek
opportunity to free itself, and, unless you amputate its tongue, it will
adhere to its language. Just exactly like a cat and a dog in one bag,
one will bark, the other will cry its own song, or, like a patched
dress, will remain patched forever.

[Illustration: Decoration]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Thirty Days in Lithuania in 1919, by 
Peter P. Saurusaitis

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THIRTY DAYS IN LITHUANIA IN 1919 ***

***** This file should be named 39888.txt or 39888.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/8/8/39888/

Produced by David Starner, Martin Pettit and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

