The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Iowa, by William Harvey Miner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Iowa

Author: William Harvey Miner

Release Date: June 9, 2012 [EBook #39952]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IOWA ***




Produced by Brian Sogard, Turgut Dincer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)







[Illustration: A GROUP OF IOWA]


   THE IOWA

   A reprint from _The Indian Record_, as originally published and edited
   by Thomas Foster, with introduction, and elucidations
   through the text

   By WILLIAM HARVEY MINER

   _With Illustrations and a Map_

   [Illustration]

   CEDAR RAPIDS, IOWA
   THE TORCH PRESS, 1911

   COPYRIGHT
   1911
   BY THE TORCH PRESS
   _August_


DEDICATED TO

A BIBLIOPHILE IN THE BEST SENSE; TO A LOVER OF BOOKS AND MEN; TO A
STUDENT OF ABORIGINAL HISTORY; TO A HIGHMINDED AMERICAN GENTLEMAN

JOSEPH PARKER CAMP


CONTENTS

                                                    PAGE
   INTRODUCTION                                       xv

   THE IOWAY MONOGRAPH                                 1

   THE IOWA CAMPING CIRCLE                            45

   TREATIES                                           49

   SYNONYMY                                           77

   LIST OF IOWA INDIANS                               83

   INDEX                                              91


ILLUSTRATIONS


   A GROUP OF IOWA                        _Frontispiece_

   (From the scarce original engraving made
   in London, when these Indians were under
   the supervision of George Catlin)

                                             FACING PAGE

   AN IOWAY GRAMMAR                                    7

   (Reproduced in facsimile from a copy of
   the rare original)

   WAW--NON--QUE--SKOON--A'S MAP                       24

   (From the original, slightly reduced, in
   Schoolcraft's INDIAN TRIBES)

   MA--HAS--KAH, THE YOUNGER                           42

   (After the colored portrait in Vail's
   NOTICE SUR LES INDIENS, etc.)


PREFACE


_The material forming the greater part of the present monograph is
reprinted verbatim et literatim from certain portions of volume 1,
Numbers 1, 2, and 3, Washington, November 30, 1876, of Foster's_ INDIAN
RECORD AND HISTORICAL DATA. _The complete work so far as carried out
consists only of the three parts here mentioned, printed in folio and
comprising four numbered pages each. The editor, Dr. Thomas Foster, who
termed himself "Indian historiographer" hoped to be able to publish the
sheet weekly "should funds permit." Evidently lack of finances or the
small amount of interest shown in the venture determined against its
continuance as it ceased with the third issue._

_During Foster's connection with the Indian Bureau at Washington, John
Q. Smith held the position of Commissioner of Indian Affairs and it is
not improbable looked with little favor on the scheme. In any event the_
RECORD _is a desideratum in most collections and as such, even a portion
of it may not be amiss in this reprint. Unfortunately its short
existence did not permit of finishing the sketches of the Iowa or
Winnebago, though it would appear that in the instance of the former but
little more would have been added. It is hoped however, that in the
foreword the more necessary data are given and that it is appropriately
terminated._

_The actual worth of the_ INDIAN RECORD _is slight. Foster's idea with
reference to several monographs relating wholly or in part to certain
tribes was a worthy one and could be executed to advantage even at this
date. The two treatises attempted in his short--lived publication were on
the Iowa and their parent stock, the Winnebago, although several shorter
tribal sketches, as for example those on the Attacapa,[1] Oroyelles,[2]
Arapahoes,[3] and Eries[4] are included among other features, these
being as scattered notes through the forty--eight columns and of more or
less value, particularly as concerns the linguistics.[5] It is evident
from his Introduction that Foster must have had many difficulties to
contend with, especially in the matter of procuring suitable faces of
type for his Indian vocabularies as well as in the matter of actual
printing. At the best the work is poorly done. The proof--reading is
wretched and the statements of fact often in grave error. Abject
carelessness in the matter of transcription appears without excuse,
hence quoted portions through the present text have invariably been read
and compared with the originals, obviously enhancing the value of such a
reissue. Although a praiseworthy effort for the period and due every
consideration at this time, a project of the kind attempted today would
fail ingloriously unless handled with requisite care._

_In the absence of any cognate facts referring in detail to the Iowa
tribe it has been deemed best to reprint Foster's sketch in its entirety
from the_ Record _and to add to it, as appendices, some features which
will be of special interest and value to the student of American
aboriginal history and ethnology. In this textual portion will be found
much from Schoolcraft's_ INDIAN TRIBES OF THE UNITED STATES, _also
extracts, some of considerable length, from the first volume of the
Minnesota Historical Society's_ COLLECTIONS, 1850--56, _and Neill's_
HISTORY OF MINNESOTA. _Nevertheless such facts as are garnered from
sources of this character although purloined, are to be welcomed, and in
a certain sense it may be considered fortunate that all of the material
is not wholly original._

_In the introductory sketch following this, an attempt has been made to
gather all material readily available on the Iowa tribe. The writer
acknowledges his indebtedness to the Bureau of American Ethnology,
without assistance from which no authentic or in any way exhaustive
sketch on any subject connected with the Indian question could be
accomplished. The many references in the form of foot--notes have been
verified with the greatest care. In many instances the meanings in the
original are ambiguous. In the present form this fault is rectified and
it is hoped that the concise yet lucid account of this important branch
of the great Siouan family may assist in giving it some of that
prominence to which it should rightfully aspire. A list of some of the
more famous warriors is included as an appendix, and though incomplete
and taken in part from printed records it will show that the tribe
numbered among its members men who were famous outside of their own
precincts, and these names may inspire some future historian to delve
even more deeply into those archives that are known to be only memoirs
of a past existence._

_Students of Iowa history or of the Indians of the central west can ill
afford to overlook a work on the Indian tribes by A. R. Fulton entitled_
THE RED MEN OF IOWA. _The volume is now scarce but fortunately the
writer has been able to use it and is glad to acknowledge its
excellence. To Worthington C. Ford, of the Massachusetts Historical
Society, and to W. H. Holmes, of the Smithsonian Institution, James
Mooney and F. W. Hodge of the Bureau of American Ethnology, he is also
indebted and wishes publicly to express his thanks for their kindly
interest._




INTRODUCTION

THE IOWA INDIANS--AN HISTORICAL--SKETCH

SYNONYMS[6]


PAH8TET. _Marquette, (1673) in Shea, Discovery, etc., p. 268, map, 1852.
Variants: Nadoessi Mascouteins, Aiounouea, Avoys, Paote, Ayoes, Aiowais,
Ayouez, Ainoves, Iawas._

HO--WAH. _Name given by the Mdewakanton (Sioux). Ioewaig, name given by
the Santee Dakota. Iyakhwa, name given by the Teton. Maqude, name given
by the Omaha Ponca. Pa'--qo--tce, name given by the Kansa. Pa'qu--te, name
given by the Quapaw. Paqutse, name given by the Osage. Pashohan, name
given by the Pawnee. Paxodshe, name given by the Kansa. Wa--qotc, name
given by the Winnebago._

IYUHBA. _Riggs, Dak. Gram. & Dict. p. 278, 1852, trans. "Sleepy Ones."
Nadouessioux Maskoutens: Minn. Hist. Coll., 1864,_

_(Part 2, p. 30, note), trans. "Sioux of the Prairies;" Algonkin name.
Pa--ho--cha: Neb. Hist. Soc., 1885, (p. 47), trans. "Dusty Men."
Pa--ho--dje: Maximilian, (p. 507, 1843) trans. "Dust Noses."_

IOWA. _Pike's Travels; Ed. of 1811 (p. 134). Variants: Iowai, Iaways,
Ihoway, Ioway, Jowoi, Jowas, Joways, Ohoa, and Pahoja, names by which
they are known among themselves. May be translated as "Gray Snow."_

SIGN. _Draw the extended right hand across the throat from left to right
as if severing the head from the body. Possibly derived from an old
Siouan custom of decapitating their prisoners._[7]

_Mallery refers to this branch of the Siouan tribe as "Cut Throats,"[8]
or a "Cut Throat" from a curious practice adopted by the Iowa after
battle. Mooney also advocates this theory though he suggests it applied
only to the Sioux and not to the whole Siouan stock and is doubtful as
to the common interpretation of the sign--a sweeping motion of the hand
in front of the neck--as the Kiowa and certain other tribes called the
Iowa the "Necklace People." He also says that this tribe was a little too
far from the plains to have a special sign and were probably merged with
the Oto, Missouri, Sauk and others in the general region of the "shaved
heads."_

The Iowa tribe of Indians forms one of the Southwestern branches of the
great Dakota or Siouan stock and has been included both linguistically
and ethnographically by careful students, with the Oto and the Missouri
tribes, forming the so--called Chiwere group.[9] The real difference
existing between the tribes here noted is one of dialect only.
Traditional evidence proves conclusively that they sprung originally
from that stem which appears to have been the parent stock of certain
other southwestern Siouan tribes, notably, the Winnebago, and from
direct information obtained from their people as late as 1883,
investigators have been told that not only the Iowa, Missouri, and Oto
tribes were from the same source but that the Ponca and Omaha could
without question be included, having "once formed part of the Winnebago
Nation."[10]

From their primal home, to the north of the Great Lakes, as tradition
has it, came the forebears of these tribes. Attracted by the abundance
of fish, the Winnebago halted on the shores of Lake Michigan, while the
other bands continued southwestward, eventually coming to the
Mississippi. At this point another division took place and it was here
that the Iowa separated from the larger group, and it is also at this
period that they received the name of Pahoja or Gray Snow.[11] Without
stopping for any length of time after separating from their comrades,
the Iowa continued down the general course of the Mississippi until Rock
River (in Illinois) was reached. At this point as in most of the early
history of the tribe we must depend largely on hearsay. Certain
traditions however, place them farther north. Waw--non--que--skoona--a's
map, drawn in 1848, shows their movements quite clearly until that date.
It is hardly necessary to reiterate statements here that appear
textually in connection with the cartographical features, especially as
these successive movements are of comparatively recent date and
considered to be substantially correct. There is a tradition still
popular among the Sioux that when their ancestors first came to the
Falls of St. Anthony the Iowa tribe occupied the country adjacent to the
Minnesota river and that the Cheyenne[12] occupied territory farther up
the same stream.[13]

On the arrival of Le Sueur in 1701 for the purpose of erecting his fort
near the mouth of the Blue Earth river, many of the tribe were found and
messengers were sent to invite them to settle in the vicinity of the
stockade, because of their excellence in farming and general husbandry.
Those despatched for this purpose found however, that the Indians had
recently moved westward toward the Missouri river and wished to be
closer to the Omaha who then dwelt in that region. The tribes with whom
Le Sueur came in contact informed him that the river upon which he was
about to settle belonged to the Sioux of the West (Dakota), the Ayavois
(Iowa), and the Otoctatas (Oto), who lived nearby. Probably the first
among the whites to come in actual contact with the Iowa, was Pere
Andre[14] who referred to them in 1676, at which time they were situated
about 200 miles west of Green Bay, Wisconsin. The next reference made by
a European seems to be that of Father Zenobius Membre[15] in 1680, who
mentions the Authontontas (Oto), Nadouessious Maskoutens (Iowa)[16]
"about 130 leagues from the Illinois river in three great villages built
near a river which empties into the Colbert (Mississippi) on the west
side above the Illinois, almost opposite the mouth of the Wisconsin." He
also seems to locate a portion of the Aiuoves (probably Aioues) to the
west of the Milwaukee river. On Marquette's manuscript map which
accompanied his Journal, 1673,[17] the Pahoutet (Iowa) are placed on or
near the Missouri river, in close company with the Maha, (Omaha) and
Ontontana (Oto). This is no doubt conjecture on the part of the
cartographer. The Sieuer de la Salle knew of both Oto and Iowa, and in
his Hennepin letter of August 22, 1682, he refers to them as Otoutanta
and Atounauea respectively. He further states that one of his
company[18] was familiar with the languages of both these tribes, which,
however, is doubtful.

When Le Sueur first supplied these Indians with firearms in 1700 they
were situated at the extreme headquarters of the Des Moines river,
though from the translation of this explorer's narrative, as contained
in WIS. HIST. COLL., Vol. XVI, it would seem that this band and the Oto
removed and "established themselves toward the Missouri river, near the
Maha." In Jefferys' FRENCH DOMINIONS IN NORTH AND SOUTH AMERICA, 1760,
the Iowa are located on the Mississippi in latitude 43 deg. 30'. His map
however places them on the east side of the Missouri, west of the
sources of the Des Moines river and above the Oto, who were on the west
side of the Missouri and below the Omaha.[19] According to Lewis &
Clark's TRAVELS, ETC., (Coues' edition, 1893), their villages consisted
"of 300 men ... on the river De Moines."[20] The map by
Waw--non--que--skoona--a as included in Schoolcraft and reproduced
herewith, gives the final stopping place of the Iowa at a point near
the junction of the Wolf and Missouri rivers, within the limits of the
present State of Nebraska. Some authorities give their final location as
being in two villages, one on the Platte[21] and another on the Great
Nemaha river, from which places they conducted traffic with the traders
from St. Louis, dealing principally in beaver, otter, racoon, deer, and
bear skins. They also appear to have been cultivators of the soil to
some extent, even at this early date, and it is recorded that Le Sueur
made efforts to have them locate near his Fort l'Huillier[22] as they
were "industrious and accustomed to cultivate the earth." In addition to
corn they grew beans[23] and Pike says "they cultivated corn but not
proportionately as much as did the Sauks and Foxes." This traveler also
states that they were less civilized than the latter.[24] At a much
earlier date Father Andre[25] writes that, while their village was a
large one they were poor as a tribe, their greatest wealth being in
"ox--hides[26] and red calumets,"[27] indicating thereby that the Iowa
early traded in and manufactured catlinite pipes. In many customs
prevailing among the Iowa it has been found that they differed but
little from cognate tribes. In their visiting, marriage relations, and
management of children they were not unlike the Omaha and others closely
allied among the Dakota. In the matter of fraternity they were distinct.
The camp circle[28] was divided into half circles and occupied by two
phratries of four gentes each.[29]

The first regulated the hunt and other affairs pertaining to the tribe
during the autumn and winter. Throughout the other parts of the year the
lead was taken by the other phratry.[30] In a general way however, the
Iowa social institution differs but slightly from others of the Siouan
stock, nor do their visiting or marriage customs vary greatly from those
of kindred tribes. Children are managed similarly to those of the Dakota
or Omaha. Formerly murder was punished with death by the nearest of kin
or by some friend of the murdered person.[31] Occasionally however,
presents were made to the avengers by the murderer, in consequence of
which the crime was palliated.

Like many other Mississippi Valley tribes the Iowa are not to any great
extent associated with the tumuli of America. With the exception of some
few mounds in Wapello County, Iowa, at a point near Iowaville, the site
of an early trading post, there is little evidence that the Iowa were in
any way connected with the mounds in that State. Along the valley
located in this section, were many spots frequented by both the Sauk and
Fox as well as Iowa and here also were situated the famous race tracks
of nearly a mile in length, belonging to the latter tribe.[32] The
various games indulged in by the Iowa differed but slightly from those
in vogue among kindred or allied tribes.[33] As is almost universal,
dice games, or games of chance are more generally to be desired, while
games of dexterity take second place. Catlin[34] describes under the
former class, one called Kon--tho--gra, or the game of platter which is
played almost exclusively by women.[35] It is said to have been
exceedingly fascinating and consists of little blocks of wood marked
with certain points for counting, to be decided by throws, the lot being
shaken in a bowl and thrown out on a sort of a pillow. Bets were made
after the bowl was turned and decided by the number of points and
colors. Another game described by Catlin[36] is called Ing--Kee--Ko--Kee,
or, The Game of the Moccasin. It was played to a song accompaniment[37]
among the Iowa by two, four or six people seated on the ground in a
circle. In the center are three or four moccasins, under one of which
the players in turn try to conceal some small article, as a stone or a
nut. The opponents choose what appears to be the lucky covering and if
successful, win the stakes. The game, according to this writer,
appeared simple and almost foolish, yet he professes to have seen it
played for hours without intermission in perfect musical rhythm, and
states that it "forms one of the principle gambling games of these
gambling people." Among the Omaha, Ponca, Oto, and Iowa the game of
Arrow (Ma^{n}muqpe), was most common. This however was more of a religious
game and now practically obsolete since the introduction of fire arms.
Arrows were shot up into trees until they lodged in the branches. The
players then tried to dislodge them and whoever brought down the first,
won. There were no sides or opposing parties. Probably the most exciting
and to many the most important game among many of the tribes, aside from
those of the Mountain Indians, is that of Ball--playing or Racket. This
is distinctly a man's game as opposed to double--ball and some other
forms commonly played by women. There are instances however of this
having been played by women, and among the Santee Sioux it is at times
played by both sexes together. This game has been divided into two
principal classes, those of the single and those of the double racket or
bat; the latter is more especially peculiar to the southern tribes.[38]
The racket may be likewise termed a throwing stick as it is used to pick
up and throw the ball rather than for the purpose of hitting. The ball
is either of wood or of buckskin stuffed with hair,[39] and the usual
size is about two and one--half inches in diameter. Various kinds of
rackets are used by the players, some preferring long and some short
handles. Among the Oto of Oklahoma, one measured was forty inches in
length.[40] Catlin[41] gives an excellent description of this game among
the Iowa Indians. His details concerning the goals and byes and various
points connected with the different features, make this sketch one of
the most complete we have.[42]

As among all tribes east and west, north and south, the Iowa were given
to their numerous dances, many of which were of the highest importance.
Mention is made here, only of several of the more common or necessary
dances, inasmuch as the subject is one if it were treated fully would
occupy a volume in itself.

This is a peculiar dance given in honor of one or more strangers whom
[Sidenote: +The Welcome Dance+] the tribe may decide to welcome to their
village. The musicians as well as spectators, out of respect, all rise
to their feet while it is being performed. The song which accompanies it
is at first one of lament, but ends in a gay and lively manner.

The most exciting as well as the longest and most tiresome of all
[Sidenote: +The War Dance+] dances. It is usually divided into three
parts, _i. e._, Eh--Ros--Ka--The Warriors Dance--usually given after a
party had returned from war as a boast and was ofttimes given as an
amusement. The song used at this time entitled Wa--Sissica--The War
Song--appeared to be addressed to the body of an enemy, from the name
Eh--Ros--Ka, meaning tribe, war party or body.[43]

The most spirited part of this greatest of all dances was called the
[Sidenote: +Approaching Dance+] in which the dancers by their gestures
exhibited the methods of advancing on an enemy. The song in this portion
is also similar to that above mentioned.[44]

Ha Kon--E--Crase, or as more familiarly known "the soaring eagle," forms
[Sidenote: +The Eagle Dance+] the third and most pleasing part of the
War Dance and is in every respect a most interesting spectacle. Each
dancer imagines himself a bird on the wing, and as they dance forward
from behind the musicians, they take the position of an eagle headed
against the wind and about to swoop down upon some unsuspecting prey.
They have a peculiar method of singing and whistling at the same
time.[45]

The Calumet Dance, the Ball--Play Dance, the Scalp Dance, the Buffalo
Dance, and the Bear Dance, are all important but vary very slightly from
those of similar import among other tribes of the same family. What we
have said about the dances applies with equal force to the songs and
music. The War Song, Death Song, Wolf Song, Medicine Song, Bread Song,
and Farewell Song are all of much significance, indeed so much so that a
large amount of space could well be devoted to this subject as well as
to the dances.

In 1836 the Iowa were assigned a reservation in northeastern Kansas,
having two years previous, ceded all their lands in Missouri. A portion
of the tribe later moved to another tract in Oklahoma allotted to them
in 1890 in severalty, the surplus acreage being opened to settlement by
the whites.

It is difficult to compile a bibliography that will treat exhaustively
of this tribe. Catlin's Works, Lewis and Clark's TRAVELS, Long's
EXPEDITION, Pike's EXPLORATIONS, Maximilian's TRAVELS, and in fact
nearly all of the prominent trans--continental explorers knew the tribe
under one or another name. In the absence of any well defined plan it is
best to refer to the various titles as shown in the index to the present
volume. Such titles are printed in small capitals throughout. Special
stress must be laid on the value of Dr. Hayden's important work,
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE ETHNOGRAPHY AND PHILOLOGY OF THE INDIAN TRIBES OF
THE MISSOURI VALLEY. Phila., 1862. The map is particularly useful. The
Burrows Brothers monumental reprint of the JESUIT RELATIONS (73 vols.
octavo) is of course invaluable.


   WILLIAM HARVEY MINER

   March 5, 1911




THE IOWAY MONOGRAPH

"IOWAY" TRIBE: (Aiyuwae, or Paehu'tchae)


This is the cognomen of a small tribe of Indians, never very
numerous,[46] known to the whites for the last one hundred and eighty
years,[47] during which period they have been wanderers from the
Mississippi to the Missouri, and from the Missouri to the Mississippi:
their migrations being confined mainly to the limits of the present
State of Iowa, which was therefore very properly named after them.[48]
They are now located within a Reservation of land on the west bank of
the Missouri, between the Great Nemahaw and Wolf Creeks, in the State of
Nebraska, on the borders of Kansas and Iowa.[49]


NOMENCLATURE

The name by which we know them--that of IOWAY--(or IOWA, which is the
form the word takes when applied to the State)--is not that for
themselves, nor is it a name which belongs to the language of any _one_
Indian tribe; but seems to have been made up, or compounded, by the
early French, from the Dakota--Sioux designation for them of Aeyu'h'aepae,
by taking the first two syllables, Ayu', and adding to it one of the
common Algonquin--French terminations to tribal names in _ois_, _vois_,
or _vais_ or _ouez_: all of which terminations appear on the early
records compounded with Ayu, or a modification of it, to indicate the
Ioway Tribe. In La Harpe's[50] narrative of Le Sueur's[51] mining
expedition, in 1700, to the Blue Earth region, in now Minnesota, where
the Ioways are first of record referred to, they are written of as
"AYA--VOIS"; in Pennecaud's[52] relation of the same expedition they
are the Aiaos or Aiavos, (his MSS[53] in the Congressional Library is
obscure); in Charlevoix's[54] history, 1722, he gives the name with a
characteristic effort at precision, as "AIOUEZ"; and in Lewis and
Clark's TRAVELS, 1812,[55] they appear as "AYAUWAYS." The French first
knew of the Ajowae through the Dakota--Sioux: (as we will observe
hereafter in the gleanings of their early history,) and it is not
surprising to me that they should (or that other Indian tribes should)
seek to find some easier way of distinguishing the Tribe than to attempt
to pronounce the extremely difficult _guttural_ ending of their Sioux
designation. THE DAKOTA--LEXICON[56] thus gives its meaning:

"Ayu'hpae, _n. p._ (_sleepy ones_:) the _Ioway Indians_."

The proper name which the Ioway give themselves, acknowledging no other,
is Paehutch'ae, _Dusty--Heads_: sometimes translated, but I think
erroneously, _Dusty--Noses_.[57] The prefix _pae_ anciently signified
_head_; and it does yet in some cognate dialects and in combinations,
especially in old hereditary proper names; though in modern parlance it
is generally confined to _nose_, but not invariably.

[Illustration:

   AN

   IOWAY GRAMMAR,

   ILLUSTRATING

   THE PRINCIPLES

   OF THE

   LANGUAGE

   USED BY THE

   IOWAY, OTOE AND MISSOURI

   INDIANS.

   [Illustration]

   PREPARED AND PRINTED

   BY

   REV. WM. HAMILTON

   AND

   REV. S. M. IRVIN.

   _Under the direction of the Presbyterian B. F. M._


   IOWAY AND SAC MISSION PRESS.

   1848.

   EXACT SIZE OF THE ORIGINAL
]

Inquiring into the origin of this name Paehutch'ae, which, whether meaning
_Dusty--Heads_ or _Dusty--Noses_, is quite a singular one for a people to
confer upon themselves, I find recorded a _theory_ to fit each
translation. In Schoolcraft's official COLLECTIONS, in a paper prepared
February 1, 1848, by the Ioway missionaries,[58] page 262, volume III, I
read of the fanciful and somewhat strained solution, as follows:

   When they [the Ioway] separated from the first Indian tribe,
   or family, to hunt game, their first location was near the
   mouth of a river, where there were large sand--bars, from which
   the wind blew quantities of sand or dust upon their faces,
   from which they were called Pa--hu--chas or Dusty--noses.

_Per contra_: During November, 1873, when I was at the former Winnebago
Agency, Blue Earth County, Minnesota, I mentioned the above theory of
the Ioway name to the intelligent Winnebago ex--Chief "Baptiste," the
Half--Breed, who in his youthful wanderings had lived a considerable time
on the Missouri amongst the Ioway. He smiled at it, and, in his broken
English at first and then through ex--Interpreter Menaige, who was
present, said, that the Ioway name meant _Dusty_, or Dusty Gray,
_Heads_, and that it occurred in this way: Living on the Missouri as
they had done in the earliest time: wandering away from it and then
wandering back again; they were accustomed to bathe a great deal in its
yellow--muddy waters; and that when they dried off after coming out of
the water, the sediment of the water remained on their _heads_ making
them look _dusty_ and _gray_; and this was the true reason they became
the Paehutch'ae, or _Dusty--Head_ Tribe. Baptiste said this was the
accepted theory amongst the old people of the Ioway as to the way
Paehutch'ae came to be their name. The Winnebago cognomen for them, which
is Waehotch'aerae, the _Gray--Ones_, is evidently but a modification of the
same _Dusty--Head_ idea: (in the Hotchank'aerae language hotch is _gray_
and raehaetch, _ashes_). And such modification is, also, I think the
Dakota--Sioux name for them of Aeyu'h'aepae, notwithstanding the
Dakota--Sioux Lexicon gives it as meaning the _Drowsy--Ones_, and to doubt
such authority may seem presumptuous. But, in these investigations I
have noticed, that aboriginal nations, unless there is some special
reason to the contrary--for instance a special enmity--(as the Chippeway
name for the Sioux of Opwan'aek, "those whom we roast,") all endeavor to
_translate_ into their own vernacular the names of neighboring tribes,
rather than adopt them bodily: a notable instance of which is, that the
name _Saulteurs_, people of the _Sault_ or _Leap_ or _Rapids_, is
repeated in idea but in different forms by both the Winnebago and the
Sioux, the latter terming them Haehae'towa and the former Raeh'aetche'rae,
both meaning, alike, "_The Falls Dwellers_." Sometimes, in these
dialectical translations, the original meaning of the tribal name was
correctly rendered, and sometimes not: the early French in fact, made
frequent failures. Now, the Sioux were well acquainted with the Ioway.
They were, at the advent of the whites, their allies and neighbors,
living as the Ioway did in 1700, on the borders of Iowa and Minnesota,
about the headwaters of the Blue Earth and Des Moines rivers:[59] though
they soon wandered from there to the Missouri again. The Dakota must
have known the name they called themselves, and the reason for it: and
what more likely than that they should endeavor to render the idea it
conveyed _literally_ into their own language? May not the Sioux name for
them, therefore, have been originally Aeyu'h'aepae, deduced thus: Ae is the
preposition _on_ or _upon_; yu "as a prefix to _adjectives_ and
sometimes to nouns, it sometimes forms verbs, and means to _make_ or
_cause to be_" (Dakota--Lexicon); h'ae, is an _adjective_, meaning, (says
the Lexicon) "_gray_ or _mixed_, as black and white, the black appearing
under the white, as in the badger;" and pae, signifying _head_. This
combination would be literally, "upon--to cause--graymixed--the head:"
which is exactly the idea that the Ioway themselves and the Winnebago
also seek to convey by their respective names Paehutch'ae, the
_Dusty--Heads_, and Waehotch'aerae, the _Gray_, (through dust?) People.




EARLY HISTORY OF THE IOWAY

The earliest mention[60] of the Tribe is in Le Sueur's narrative of his
expedition in 1700 to the fancied copper mines[61] of _Riviere de
Vert_, (the Blue Earth tributary of the Minnesota river), embodied in La
Harpe's mss.[62] HISTORY OF LOUISIANA, parts of which including Le
Sueur's NARRATIVE, have been recently published.[63] As to this mine, we
are told in the mss. copy[64] in the Congressional Library of the
RELATION OF PENICAUD, the shipwright who accompanied Le Sueur--"a man,
(says Neill,[65] the erudite historian of Minnesota) of discernment but
little scholarship"--that:

   M. Le Sueur had heard of the mine some years before while
   travelling in the country of the Aiaos--(or Aivoe: the name has
   been written twice: and the orthography is obscure,)--where he
   traded.

This acquaintance with the Ioway must have been achieved when, as chief
trader,[66] he occupied the "factory" of "Fort Perrot" on the "left" or
east bank of the Mississippi,[67] just below Point Le Sable, near the
foot of Lake Pepin: which first trading post of the upper Mississippi
was erected in 1683, by Nicholas Perrot[68] and M. le Sueur by order of
Governor De la Barre,[69] of Canada, "to establish (says the historian
Neill) friendly alliances with the Ioway and Dakota"; and this post was
for years the only one in all that region, until Le Sueur himself, in
1695, built the "French factory" of "Isle Pelee," at the "right" bank,
on Prairie or "Bald" Island, about ten miles below the St. Croix. The
Ioway, (as will hereafter appear), occupied at that time a not very
remote nor inaccessible location from Fort Perrot, in the region around
and amidst the head waters of the Des Moines and Blue Earth rivers, and
being allies of the Sioux, they doubtless brought their furs and
obtained their trading supplies of Le Sueur at this "Fort": and it is
not improbable that Le Sueur (and his engages) also travelled in their
country on hunting or trading expeditions.

In La Harpe's account of Le Sueur's long "voyage" up the Mississippi
from its mouth to the "mine" with his "felucca,[70] two canoes and
twenty men,"[71] the Ioway are frequently mentioned. The first instance
is when about the 14th[72] of July, 1700, as he passed the mouth of the
Illinois, he "met three Canadian voyageurs, who came to join his band,
and received by them a letter from Father Marest,[73] Jesuit, dated July
10, 1700, at the Mission of the Immaculate Conception of the Holy Virgin
in Illinois:" of which the following is a copy:

   I have the honor to write in order to inform you, that the
   Saugiestas have been defeated by the Scioux and the
   Ayavois.[74] The people have formed an alliance with the
   Quincapous, and some of the Mecoutins, Renards, and
   Metesigamias, and gone to revenge themselves, not on the
   Scioux, for they are too much afraid of them, but perhaps on
   the Ayavois, or very likely upon the Paoutees, or more
   probably upon the Osages, for these suspect nothing, and the
   others are on their guard. As you will probably meet these
   allied nations, you ought to take precaution against their
   plans, and not allow them to board your vessel, since they are
   traitors, and utterly faithless. I pray God to accompany you
   in all your designs.

This letter of Father Marest shows, that the Ioway were then in alliance
with the Sioux, and establishes, that their Indo--_French_ name of
"_Ayavois_" was already pretty well understood: and that even their own
name for themselves was not unknown, PAOUTEES, or--(to transliterate the
French orthography into our Indian alphabet),--Paeut'aes, was not far off
from their true designation of Paehutchaes: though, curiously enough, they
are held to be another tribe! The warning of this war-party given Le
Sueur by the "Father" proved no false alarm; for just below the
Wisconsin, "five Canadians" were met with, "descending from the Scioux
to go to Tamarois," who, above the Wisconsin, had been fallen in with by
a war--party of "ninety savages in nine canoes," being of "four different
nations, the _Outagamis_ [Foxes], _Saquis_ [Saukes], _Poutouwatamis_ and
_Puans_ [Winnebago]", who had "robbed and cruelly beat them." Taking
these five men with him as volunteers, Le Sueur proceeded up the river
until he met this war--party near Black River, returning from an
unsuccessful encounter with the "_Scioux_," and brought them to terms,
and, being evidently too strong for them to maltreat or meddle with in
any way, extorted a kind of apology from them for what they had done.

On the first of October Le Sueur finally reached his destination near
his "_mine_." We extract from the narrative of his proceeding while here
so much of it as refers to the Ioway:

   After he [Le Sueur] entered into BLUE river, thus named on
   account of the MINES of blue earth found at its mouth, he
   founded his post, situated in 44 degrees 13 minutes north
   latitude. He met at this place nine Scioux, who told him the
   river belonged to the Scioux of the WEST, the AYAVOIS
   [Ioways], and Otoctatas [Otoes], who lived a little farther
   off: that it was not their [the "Scioux"] custom to hunt on
   ground belonging to others, unless invited to do so by the
   owners, and that when they would come to the fort to obtain
   provisions they would be in danger of being killed in
   ascending or descending the rivers, which were narrow, and
   that if he would show them pity, he must establish himself on
   the Mississippi, near the mouth of the St. Pierre, where the
   AYAVOIS, the OTOCTATAS, and the other SCIOUX, could go as well
   as them.... Le Sueur had forseen that the establishment of
   BLUE river would not please the SCIOUX, ... because they were
   the first with whom trade was commenced, and in consequence of
   which they had already quite a number of guns.... On the 3d of
   October, they received at the fort several SCIOUX, among whom
   was WAHKANTAPE, chief of the village. Soon two Canadians
   arrived who had been hunting, and had been robbed by the
   SCIOUX of the east, who had raised their guns against the
   establishment which M. LE SUEUR had made on Blue river. On the
   14th the fort was finished and named "Fort L'Huillier," and on
   the 22d two Canadians were sent out to invite the Ayavois and
   Otoctatas to come and establish a village near the fort,
   because these Indians are industrious [?] and accustomed to
   cultivate the earth, [?] and they hoped to get provisions from
   them and to make them work [!] in the mines.

An assertion, a hope and an expectation which rather proves, that Le
Sueur knew nothing of these Indians from actual observation in their
country, but only knew of them from report and by a few individuals
whom he probably met for trade at the posts at Forts _Perrot_ or _Isle
Pele_; for there is no evidence that they ever were "industrious," or
given to "cultivating the earth" any more than other Indians: nor are
they at this day. But, to continue our extracts:

   The same day [the 24th] the Canadians, who had been sent off
   on the 22d arrived without having found the road which led to
   the Ayavois and Otoctates.

   ... On the 16th [of Nov.] the Scioux returned to their
   village, and it was reported that the Ayavois and Otoctatas
   were going to establish themselves towards the Missouri river,
   near the Maha [Omahaw], who dwell in that region.

In May, 1701, Le Sueur left Fort d'Huillier in charge of M. d'Evaque, a
Canadian gentleman, with a force of twelve Frenchmen, while he himself
in his felucca with the rest of his men returned to Mobile, carrying
with him "three canoe loads," or "four thousand pounds," of the "green
earth," supposed to be oxide of copper, but which was really from a kind
of shelly marly strata, interposed between the fossiliferous limestone
and the sandstone of that region, that was colored bluish--green by
silicate of iron. We next find Le Sueur--(who it has been stated was the
father of the three distinguished brothers D'Iberville, DeBienville, and
Sauvolle)[75]--in the summer of 1701 accompanying D'Iberville, the
Governor of Louisiana, on his return to France, and assisting him while
on shipboard in concocting a Memorial on the Mississippi Valley,
addressed to the French government: in which D'Iberville says:

   He [M. LE SUEUR] has spoken to me of another, [nation] which
   he calls the Mahas, [Omahaw], composed of more than twelve
   hundred families [!], the Ayooues and the Octootatas, their
   neighbors, are about three hundred families. They occupy the
   lands between the Mississippi and the Missouri, about one
   hundred leagues from the Illinois. These savages do not know
   the use of (fire?) arms....

The memorial, (a manuscript copy of which, quoted by Professor Neill in
his Minnesota history, is in possession of the Historical Society of
that State), contains the first _attempt_ we have upon the record at a
_Census_ of the Tribes of the Mississippi, and partially of the Missouri
Valleys: made thirty--four years before the French Census of the Cass
manuscript[76]--a census formerly claimed as being the very first
extant--so claimed by Schoolcraft, in the third volume of his
COLLECTIONS.

Penicaud, the carpenter, states, that D'Evaque and the men Le Sueur left
in charge of the Blue Earth post, abandoned it, and returned to Mobile
[arriving there on the 3d of March], 1703, having left, as they alleged,
on account of being warred upon "by the nations of Maskoutens and
Foxes," and "seeing that he was out of powder and lead." Le Sueur for
several years after his operations on the Blue--Earth was kept busy
leading expeditions against the Natchez and other Indians of the
southwest; and is said to have died[77] on the road during one of them.

Some further information in regard to the Ioway is gathered from a chart
of the northwestern part of Louisiana, by "WILLIAM DE L'ISLE, _de
l'Academy Royale des Sciences, et Premier Geographe du Roy: a Paris_:
1703" in the preparation of which Le Sueur probably assisted by his
notes and observations.[78] A section of this map, (lithographed for
Neill's History of Minnesota), shows a traders trail marked "_Chemin des
Voyageurs_," across the State of Iowa, commencing at the Mississippi, a
few miles below the mouth of the Wisconsin, and following west by a
little north until in the vicinity of Spirit Lake, it struck just below
the lowest of the lakes which are at the head of the Little Sioux river,
upon which lower lake is marked "Village des Aiaoues _ou_ Paoutez"
(Paehutch'ae); then continuing due westward towards the Big Sioux this
_Chemin du Voyageurs_ bends a little southward towards the mouth of that
river; on which river, near the Missouri, three or four villages of
"_Maha_" (Omahaw), are marked. Besides these a couple of minor
"_Aianouez_" villages are likewise set down at the west end of the
_Chemin des Voyageurs_ where it strikes the Big Sioux, which is
apparently about the junction of "Fish Creek" with it: [See
Waw--non--que--skoon--a's map of Ioway migrations in Vol. III,
Schoolcraft, page 256],[79] and again further westward, considerably
beyond the western termination of the "_Chemin_" on the James River,
four minor villages of "_Aiaouez_" are also noted: while far south by a
little east of the first mentioned main "Village des Aiaoues _ou
Paoutez_," upon the north or "left" bank of the Missouri river at a
point nearly due west from the mouth of the "_Des Moines ou le
Moingona_," we find located the "Yoways," and a few miles above them on
the same side, the "Les Octotata": which locations were not a great
distance from the spot where the Ioway and Otoe now live upon one common
"Reservation," on the opposite side of the Missouri just within
Nebraska.




ANTE--WHITE HISTORY OF THE IOWAY

[Illustration: MAP of the COUNTRY _formerly occupied by the_ IOWAY TRIBE
of INDIANS from a map made by WAW--NON--QUE--SKOON--A AN IOWAY BRAVE

Drawn by Capt. S. Eastman. U.S. Army Engraved by W. Williams.]

For the history of the Ioway before the whites knew them, there is no
data, beyond language and ancestral beliefs and customs, except their
own vague traditions or those equally vague and uncertain of other
tribes. The Reverends William Hamilton, and S. M. Irvin, their
missionaries, communicated to Schoolcraft[80] in 1848, this statement of
"an old Ioway Indian [aged] about sixty years or more."

   About sixty--six years ago, we lived on a river, which runs
   from a lake to the Mississippi, from the east, and on the east
   side of that river. Our fathers and great fathers lived there
   for a long time, as long as they could recollect. At that time
   we had about four hundred men fit to go to war, but we were
   then small to what we had been. Our fathers say, as long as
   they can recollect, we have been diminishing. (This is a usual
   Indian complaint: in most instances an unfounded one). We
   owned all the land east of the Mississippi. (This usual Indian
   claim of very extended possessions has generally very little
   foundation in fact). Whatever ground we made tracks through,
   it was ours. Our fathers saw white men on the [great?] lakes
   about 120 years ago; [Nearer 200 probably]; do not know where
   they came from. About the same time we first got guns. We were
   afraid of them at first, they seemed like the "Great Spirit."
   Our fathers also, at the same time, for the first received
   iron, axes, hoes, kettles and woollen blankets. We, the
   [present] old men of our nation, first saw white men between
   forty and fifty years ago, near the mouth of the Missouri.

The same missionary gentlemen, in the same paper, make these
observations, which every one who has ever engaged in Indian researches,
or in inquiries of the Indians themselves, will endorse as entirely
correct:

   In tracing their history, religion, &c., it will be
   exceedingly difficult to proceed with certainty and
   satisfaction, from the differences we find in the notions of
   different individuals: _e. g._ today we will sit down with an
   old Indian, who will enter into a plausible detail of their
   history, or religious belief, or some traditions of their
   fathers. Another of the same age and patriarchal rights will
   give quite a different statement about the same things; or
   perhaps the same individual would tomorrow give his own story
   quite a different shade. This is the reason why the reports of
   the transient observers vary so much. It requires long
   acquaintance, and close observation, to arrive at anything
   like just conclusions on these points; and it is only by
   collecting different and conflicting notions, and balancing
   them, that we can find which prevails.

Now, in regard to the story of the "old Ioway Indian" above quoted, it
may be remarked that it is quite certain the Ioway Tribe did not "about
sixty years" previous to 1848, that is, in 1788, live anywhere on the
east side of the Mississippi, nor had they for more than a hundred years
before 1848, and it is doubtful if they had ever done so since the
advent of the whites upon the great lakes. But though documents extant
negative this story of the "old Ioway Indian" as to _time_, may there
not be in this statement the shadowy tribal recollection of the period
when they were a Band of the Hotchankaerae or Winnebago, and lived near
them? This lake and river "east of the Mississippi," their former
residence, may have been _Mille Lacs_ and its outlet in Minnesota,
subsequently the home of the Sioux when first visited by De Groseilliers
and Raddison,[81] and then by DuLuth[82] and Hennepin? or the Chippeway
River? or the Wisconsin? or _Rock River_? Traditions of the Santee
[Esanyaete] Sioux who up to 1852 occupied the upper Mississippi in
Minnesota allege that when they emigrated from the North the Ioway were
in possession of the region around the mouth of the Minnesota river, and
that they drove them away. On this head, two of their reliable
missionaries, Reverends Dr. Williamson and G. H. Pond, have communicated
articles to the Minnesota Historical Collections.

Mr. Pond writes, in the number for 1852, pages 23 and 24, as follows:

   Takoha, the old war prophet, says that the Iowa Indian never
   occupied the country around the mouth of the Minnesota river.
   He affirms that it once belonged to the Winnebagoes who were
   long ago driven from it by the Dakotas--a few others of the
   Dakotas agree with Takoha. But Black Tomahawk, who is by some
   of the most intelligent half--breeds considered the best
   Mdewakantonwan traditionist, says that in the earliest years
   of the existence of the Dakotas they became acquainted with
   the Iowa Indians, and that they lived in a village at the
   place which is now called Oak Grove, seven or eight miles from
   Fort Snelling, on the north side of the Minnesota river. The
   numerous little mounds which are to be seen about Oak Grove,
   he says, are the works of the Iowa Indians.

   The old man says that in ancient times, when the Dakotas had
   no arms but the bow and stone or horn headed arrows, and used
   knives and axes manufactured from the same materials, these
   little mounds which we now see at the place above named were
   the dwellings of the Iowas. They were the enemies of the
   Dakotas, who used occasionally to make a warpath from Mille
   Lac, where they then resided, down to the Iowa village, and
   carry off with them scalps, which made glad the hearts of
   their wives and daughters. The strife between the two nations
   eventually became desperate, and the gods, who are always
   deeply interested in Indian wars, espoused the cause of the
   Dakotas.

   The thunder, which the Dakotas believe to be a winged monster,
   and which in character seems to answer very well to the Mars
   of the ancient heathen, bore down upon the Iowa village in a
   most terrible and god--like manner. Tempests howled, the forked
   lightnings flashed, and the thunders uttered their voices; the
   earth trembled; a thunderbolt was hurled at the devoted
   village, which ploughed the earth, and formed that deep ravine
   near the present dwelling of Peter Quinn. This occurrence
   unnerved the Iowas, and the Dakotas, taking advantage of it,
   fell upon their enemies and drove them across the Minnesota
   river and burned up their village.

   The Iowas then built another village on the south side of the
   river near the present planting grounds of Grey Iron, where
   they remained till the Dakotas obtained firearms, when they
   fought their last battle with them in Minnesota, on Pilot
   Knob, back of Mendota. The Iowas who escaped on this occasion
   fled and erected their next village at the mouth of the Iowa
   river, from which they were again eventually driven by the
   Dakotas towards the Missouri. The old man from whom we gather
   the substance of what has gone before says that these mounds
   are the remains of the dwelling houses of the ancient Iowas.
   Some say that they are not the remains of the dwellings of the
   Iowas, but those of some other people with whom tradition does
   not acquaint them; and others still say that they are ancient
   burial places.

   The following two or three facts may not be without interest
   to the reader. Some six years since, Mr. Quinn of Oak Grove
   removed the earth of one of these mounds at the same place
   where Black Tomahawk says the ancient Iowa village stood. As
   the earth was removed on a level with the natural surrounding
   surface, charred poles and human bones were found.

   It was easy and natural for the imagination to supply the
   rest, and make the fact corroborate the tradition of the old
   man, when he says that the Iowas constructed their houses by
   leaning poles together at the top and spreading them at the
   foot, forming a circular frame, which they covered with earth.
   In one of these houses a man or woman had been killed, and the
   timbers of the house fired, which, of course, would let the
   earth fall in upon the dead body and burning poles.

Dr. Williamson, on page 10 to 12, of the Minnesota Historical
Collections of 1856, says:

   We think it is sufficiently manifest that the Sioux occupied
   the better part of Minnesota when Europeans entered it, a
   little after the middle of the seventeenth century. It does
   not, however, appear that they were the first, much less the
   only inhabitants of the country. Their common and most
   reliable traditions inform us, that when their ancestors first
   came to the Falls of St. Anthony, the Iowas--whom they call
   AYUHBA [Drowsy]--occupied the country about the mouth of the
   Minnesota river, and the Shiens, called by the Dakotas
   SHA--I--ENA, sometimes written by the French Chaienne, and by
   others Shiene, dwelt higher up on the same river. We cannot
   pretend to determine with certainty at what time the Sioux
   first came to the Falls of St. Anthony; but may say, with
   confidence, it was a long time ago, probably before the
   discovery of America by Columbus. One of the best informed men
   concerning their traditions that I have met with among the
   Dakotas, who has been dead more than ten years, when
   questioned on this point, told me, that they supposed it to
   be at least equal to the lifetime of four old men, who should
   live one after the other; and as an example of an old man,
   named his father, who, I suppose, was at the time at least
   eighty years old, [which would make the time three hundred
   years.]

   The Winnebagoes, Otoes, and Omahas, have been named among the
   nations driven by the ancestors of the Dakotas from the
   Minnesota valley. I have not found any evidence, satisfactory
   to my mind, that the Winnebagoes ever had a home in this
   Territory prior to their late removal into it by the United
   States government. As respects the Otoes and Omahas it seems
   not improbable that they were reckoned as a part of the Dakota
   nation, when the Sioux first hunted on the banks of the
   Mississippi, and for some time after. The Anthontantas,
   mentioned as a part of the Nadouesiouz, by Hennepin, were
   probably the same people as the Otoctatas, mentioned in
   connection with the Ayavois, as owners of the country about
   Blue Earth river, in the fragment of Le Sueur, preserved by La
   Harpe, and again some further on, as having recently left
   their village in that neighborhood, and settled near the Mahas
   on the Missouri river, and it is highly probable that the
   Otoctatas of Le Sueur are the same people now called Ottoes or
   Otoes. The Mawhaws, Shiens and Schiannesse, are mentioned by
   Carver, as bands of the Naudowessiex of the plains. Thus it
   appears that the Shiens, the Iowas, the Omahas and the Ottoes,
   were the earliest inhabitants of Minnesota of whom we have any
   written or certain traditional account. I have neither seen
   nor heard of any artificial mounds, ancient fortifications, or
   monuments of any kind in or near the Minnesota valley, which
   might not have been constructed by these Indians. Such mounds
   are probably as numerous in the lower part of the valley of
   the Minnesota, and the contiguous part of the Mississippi, as
   anywhere else between the Alleghany and Rocky Mountains; but
   they are very small, compared with those near the Ohio, not to
   speak of those farther south. Some of them are still used by
   the Dakotas, as burying places for their dead, and in this way
   are receiving a small increase almost every year. The
   situation of many others indicates that they had a similar
   origin.

   But by far the most numerous class appear from their size and
   situation, to be what Dakota tradition says they are, the
   remains of houses, made of poles and bark, covered with earth,
   such as were a few years since, and probably still are, the
   habitations of the Mandans, and some other tribes living on
   the Missouri.... Mounds of this class are found in clusters,
   of from less than half a dozen to upwards of fifty, arranged
   irregularly as we find the bark houses of the Indians at
   present. Their base usually approaches to an oval form. Their
   length is from ten to forty feet, and a few exceed this, with
   a height of from one or two feet, to three or four. Very few
   of this class exceed four feet; though some of those used for
   places of sepulture are more than twice that height. Back of
   them we find the land level, or nearly so, dry and fertile. In
   front it descends towards some water, and almost always there
   is a lake or morass in sight, indicating that the inhabitants
   depended for a subsistence partly on cultivating the earth,
   and partly on water fowl or roots, which they obtained from
   wet swampy land. Several clusters of such mounds may be seen
   about Oak Grove, where the Dakotas say the Iowas lived, when
   their ancestors first came to this country. The path from
   Mendota to Shakopee, or Prairieville, passes through several.
   One large one, a little south of what has been called Black
   Dog's or Grey Iron's village, where the IOWAS are said to have
   resided after they were driven from Oak Grove. Another is not
   far from the tamarack swamp below Shakopee. Many may be found
   on the bluffs of the Mississippi and Lake Pepin. Such mounds
   are very numerous in the prairie near the mouth of Cannon
   river.

   It is somewhat remarkable that the Iowas, whose language shows
   that they are descended from the same stock as the Dakotas,
   should have been viewed and treated by the Dakotas as enemies.
   While the SHIENS, who Gallatin says have a language kindred to
   the Algonquin, were received as allies, and though speaking a
   different language were long, if they are not still counted as
   a part of the Dakota nation. Hence their name, Sha--i--e--na in
   the Ihanktonwan dialect, being equivalent to Sha--i--api in the
   Isanyati [missionary special alphabet spelling][83] both
   applied to those who speak a different language from the
   Dakotas, and applied especially to Shiens, because all others
   speaking a different language were counted as enemies. It is
   also worthy of remark, that notwithstanding the hostility
   between the Iowas and Sioux, the former, who are called by the
   latter Ayukba, (they sleep, or "sleepy ones"), from which we
   probably got Iowa, remain much nearer their original location
   than the Shiens, or any of the other tribes, who dwelt in the
   Minnesota valley before the Dakotas.

   When the Dakotas first came in contact with the Shiens, I
   have not been able to learn, farther than that the Shiens
   formerly planted on the Minnesota, between Blue Earth and
   Lac--qui--Parle, whence they moved to a western branch of Red
   River of the North, which still bears their name; being called
   by the Dakotas who hunt in that region, Shai--e--na--wojupi,
   ("the place where those of another language plant"). The
   various spellings of this name, all show plainly their origin
   from the Dakota name. From this planting place on the
   Chaienne, or Shienne of the North, this people removed across
   the Missouri, where they gave their name to another river; and
   having ceased to cultivate the soil, it is said they now hunt
   on the head waters of the Platte and of the Arkansas. From
   their retiring so rapidly, it is probable that the Shiens had
   not occupied the Minnesota valley long before the arrival of
   the Dakotas, and that the first inhabitants of it, if not the
   Iowas, were Otoes, Omahas, or some other family of the Dakota
   stock. The languages of the tribes just named, as well as of
   the Winnebagoes and Osages, are so similar to the Dakota, as
   to indicate a common origin. In the languages of the Mandans,
   Minetares and Crows or Upsarakas, so many Dakota words have
   been found, as to render it highly probable, that they also,
   in part at least, belong to the same stock....

   Various circumstances, ... indicate that the Sioux resided
   long in the region where Hennepin found them. Many of them
   suppose that they originated there. They [the modern
   Sioux],[84] have a tradition, however, that their ancestors
   came thither from the Northeast, where they had resided on a
   lake. It has been generally supposed, that the lake referred
   to in this tradition, is Rainy lake, or Lake of the Woods. It
   is more probable, however, that it was the northern shore of
   Lake Superior, or Hudson's Bay, or some of the lakes between
   those large expanses of water. The Ojibwas have a tradition,
   that their ancestors drove the Sioux from the shores of Lake
   Superior.

In Schoolcraft's COLLECTIONS, Volume III, page 256, there is presented a
map drawn by the Ioway Missionaries, the Reverends Hamilton and Irvin,
from the rough draft of "WAW--NON--QUE--SKOON--A," an Ioway brave, showing
the successive migrations of the tribe: their starting point being given
from the mouth of Rock River in Illinois: which last named river, it may
be observed, answers exactly the description of the one on which was the
ancient or first residence of the Tribe mentioned in the tradition
before given as being "a river which runs from a lake to the Mississippi
from the east, and on the east side of that river:" Rock river heading
as is well known in the "Four Lakes" upon the banks of one of which
Madison, the capital of Wisconsin, is built, and also in another, Lake
Koshkonong; which lakes, however, did not become the seat of the
Winnebago until long after they were known to the whites. The
letter--press description of this map of the "Migrations of the Ioway,"
Vol. III, at page 257, of Schoolcraft, we here copy, with additional
explanations, inserted in brackets:

   The object of Waw--non--que--skoon--a was to denote the places
   where the Iowas had lived during the sixteen migrations which
   preceded their residence at their present location, the
   Missouri; and, in truth, it nearly exhausts their history. The
   marks to denote a fixed residence, are a symbol for a lodge.
   These are carefully preserved, with their exact relative
   position. Their order, as given, is also preserved by figures.
   Could eras be affixed to these residences, it would give
   entire accuracy to the modern part of their history.

   As it is, it depicts some curious facts in the history of
   predatory and erratic tribes, showing how they sometimes
   crossed their own track, and demonstrates the immense
   distances to which they rove.

   The earliest date to which their recollection extends, as
   indicated by location No. 1, is at [or near] the junction of
   Rock river with the Mississippi. This was, manifestly, in or
   very near Winnebago territory, and confirms the traditions of
   several of the Missouri tribes (vide Fletcher's paper), [and
   also of the Ioway Indian aged "sixty years or more"]. From
   this point they migrated down the Mississippi to the river Des
   Moines, and fixed themselves at No. 2, on its south fork.
   [eighty miles above the mouth]. They next made an
   extraordinary migration, abandoning the Mississippi and all
   its upper tributaries, and ascending the Missouri to a point
   of land formed by a small stream, on its east shore, called by
   the Indians Fish creek, which flows in from the direction of,
   and not far from, the celebrated Red Pipe stone quarry, on
   the heights of the Coteau des Prairies. No. 3.

   They next descended the Missouri to the junction of the
   Nebraska, or Great Platte river, with that stream. No. 4. They
   settled on the west [or right] bank, keeping the buffalo
   ranges on their west. They next migrated still lower down the
   Missouri, and [crossing to its left side], fixed themselves on
   the headwaters of the Little Platte river. [not far from Fort
   Leavenworth], No. 5.

   From this location, when circumstances had rendered another
   change desirable, they returned to the Mississippi, and
   located themselves at the mouth of Salt river. No. 6. Here
   passed another period. They next ascended the Mississippi, and
   settled on its ["left"] east bank, at the junction of a stream
   in the present area of Illinois. [about midway between the Des
   Moines and the Ioway]. No. 7. Their next migration carried
   them still higher on that shore, [nearer the mouth of the
   Ioway] to the junction of another stream, No. 8, which is well
   nigh--[within fifty or sixty miles], to their original starting
   point at No. 1.

   They receded again to the south and west, first fixing
   themselves on Salt river, No. 9, above their prior site, No.
   6, and afterwards changing their location to its very source.
   [about thirty miles higher]. No. 10. They then passed,
   evidently by land, [about sixty miles due west], to the higher
   forks of the river Chariton, of Missouri, No. 11, and next
   descended that stream to near its mouth. No. 12. The next two
   migrations of this tribe were [about thirty miles] to the west
   valley of the Grand river, and then to its forks. [twenty--five
   miles from them]. No. 14. Still continuing their general
   migrations to the south and west, they chose the east bank of
   the Missouri, opposite the present site of Fort Leavenworth,
   No. 15, and finally settled on the west bank of the Missouri,
   [on their Reservation] between the mouth of the Wolf and Great
   Namahaw, No. 16, where they now reside.[85]

   These migrations are deemed to be all of quite modern date,
   not excepting the probable period to which well--known
   tradition could reach. They do not, it would seem, aspire to
   the area of their ancient residence on the lower and upper
   Iowa rivers, and about the region of St. Anthony's falls.[86]

   We are taught something by these migrations. They were
   probably determined by the facility of procuring food. They
   relied, ever, greatly on the deer, elk, and buffalo. As these
   species are subject to changes, it is probable they carried
   the Indians with them.[87] It is not probable that their
   locations were of long continuance at a place. Not over a
   dozen years at a location, on the average. It might be longer
   at some places, and less at others. This would not give a
   period of more than 180 years, before their arrival at their
   present place....[88]

   It is not probable that the game--pursuing Indians were more
   fixed in their ancient, than in their modern locations.
   Indeed, the very reverse is true; for the modern hunter tribes
   avail themselves of the proximity of military posts, and
   out--settlements, to guard themselves from the approaches of
   hostile bands.

   The population of the Iowas, as given at early dates, is very
   uniform, having evidently been copied by one writer from
   another. In some ancient MS. data in the Royal Marine Office,
   at Paris, which were submitted to the inspection of the
   American Minister (General Cass) in 1842, their numbers were
   put down, for about 1730, at 1100. When Colonel Bouquet
   marched over the Alleghanies against the western Indians, in
   1764, the same numbers were used. Each of these dates assigns
   their residence to the Missouri, and there had, evidently, no
   recent information been received. The French alone were at
   that time in communication with them, and their alliance with
   the western Indians, in this war, made it impracticable to
   obtain further data.

By the official returns made to the Indian Bureau, in 1848, they are
stated at "a fraction under seven hundred and fifty souls," but in
Sub--Agent Vaughan's report in the fall of the same year, 669 is the
enumeration.[89] In the report of 1844 their census is stated at 470.
In 1701,[90] D'Iberville's memorial[91] to France says:

   the Ayooues and the Octootatas, their neighbors, are about 300
   families. [In M. Chauvignerie's Report[92] of the Census of
   tribes, made to the French government in 1736, the "Ayouas"
   are put down at 80 warriors].

In the report of the Indian Bureau for 1874, the Ioway and Otoe
together, including some Sauk and some Missourie, numbered 864 persons.

It is recorded, that there were ten Ioway ("Ayeouais") with Montcalm and
the French Army at the seige of Ticonderoga in July, 1757, and also 48
Winnebago ("Puants")--De Tailly being their joint Interpreter.

According to Lieutenant Zebulon M. Pike's report of 1806,[93] the
"Aiowais" were called by the French, colloquially, "_Ne Perce_"; which
was probably "_Nez Perce_," Pierced or Perforated Noses:[94] the first
syllable of Paehutchae, their own tribal name, being translated _nose_,
which in some word--relations would be correct; while probably the last
two syllables--ru'tchae--were deemed to be in the sense of Keru'tchae, a
word signifying to _divide_ or _part_. This was a near enough
translation for the early French traders, who were not particular.

[Illustration: MA--HAS--KAH, THE YOUNGER]


APPENDICES


APPENDIX A

THE IOWA CAMPING CIRCLE


The camping circle among the Iowa was usually divided into two half
circles, each occupied by two phratries of four gentes each. These
regulated the hunt and numerous other tribal affairs during the four
seasons, the first phratry taking the lead during Autumn and Winter; the
second during Spring and Summer.

The list which follows was prepared in part by Rev. William Hamilton
about 1880 and before his death communicated to the late J. O. Dorsey,
who added a considerable number of gentes and subgentes, some further
assistance being obtained through the aid of a delegation of Iowa while
on a visit to Washington.

[Table: FIRST PHRATRY]

[Table: SECOND PHRATRY]


APPENDIX B

   TREATIES BETWEEN THE IOWA AND THE UNITED STATES, 1815--1861


(For further reference to treaties with complete amendments thereto see
LAWS AND TREATIES, by Charles J. Kappler, 2 vols. Washington, 1903. The
early texts of some of the first peace negotiations previous to the
publication date, can be found in the volumes of THE AMERICAN STATE
PAPERS, edited by Walter Lowrie and Matthew St. C. Clarke, _Indian
Affairs_, 2 vols. Washington, 1832. See also Royce, CESSIONS OF LAND BY
INDIAN TRIBES TO THE UNITED STATES, in Rep. B. A. E., vol. 1, 1881, and
the same author's INDIAN LAND CESSIONS IN THE UNITED STATES, Rep. B. A.
E., 1889).


   TREATY WITH THE IOWAS, [SEPTEMBER 16,] 1815


   _A treaty of peace and friendship, made and concluded at
   Portage des Sioux, between William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and
   Auguste Chouteau, Commissioners Plenipotentiary of the United
   States of America, on the part and behalf of the said States,
   of the one part; and the undersigned, King, Chiefs, and
   Warriors, of the Iaway Tribe or Nation, on the part and behalf
   of the said Tribe or Nation, of the other part._


The parties being desirous of re--establishing peace and friendship
between the United States and the said tribe or nation, and of being
placed in all things, and in every respect, on the same footing upon
which they stood before the war, have agreed to the following articles:


ARTICLE 1

Every injury, or act of hostility, by one or either of the contracting
parties against the other shall be mutually forgiven and forgot.


ARTICLE 2

There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between all the citizens
of the United States and all the individuals composing the said Ioway
tribe or nation.


ARTICLE 3

The contracting parties do hereby agree, promise, and oblige themselves,
reciprocally to deliver up all the prisoners now in their hands, (by
what means soever the same may have come into their possession,) to the
officer commanding at St. Louis, to be by him restored to their
respective nations, as soon as it may be practicable.


ARTICLE 4

The contracting parties, in the sincerity of mutual friendship,
recognize, re--establish, and confirm, all and every treaty, contract,
and agreement, heretofore concluded between the United States and the
said Ioway tribe or nation.


   TREATY WITH THE IOWAYS [AUG. 4,] 1824

   _Articles of a treaty made and concluded at the city of
   Washington, on the 4th day of August, 1824, between William
   Clark, Superintendent of Indian Affairs, being specially
   authorized by the President of the United States thereto, and
   the undersigned chiefs and headmen of the Ioway tribe or
   nation, duly authorized and empowered by the said nation._

ARTICLE I. The Ioway tribe or nation of Indians, by their deputies,
Mah--hos--kah, (or White Cloud,) and Mah--ne--hah--nah, (or Great
Walker,) in council assembled, do hereby agree, in consideration of a
certain sum of money, etc., to be paid to the said Ioway tribe by the
Government of the United States, as hereinafter stipulated, to cede and
forever quit claim, and do, in behalf of their said tribe, hereby cede,
relinquish, and forever quit claim, unto the United States, all right,
title, interest, and claim to the lands which the said Ioway tribe have
or claim within the State of Missouri, and situated between the
Mississippi and Missouri rivers, and a line running from the Missouri,
at the mouth or entrance of Kanzas river, north one hundred miles, to
the northwest corner of the limits of the State of Missouri, and from
thence east to the Mississippi.

ARTICLE II. It is hereby stipulated and agreed, on the part of the
United States, as a full compensation for the claims and lands ceded by
the Ioway tribe in the preceding article, there shall be paid to the
said Ioway tribe, within the present year, in cash or merchandise, the
amount of five hundred dollars; and the United States do further agree
to pay to the said Ioway tribe five hundred dollars annually, for the
term of ten succeeding years.

ARTICLE III. The chiefs and headmen, who sign this treaty, for
themselves, and in behalf of their tribe, do acknowledge the lands east
and south of the lines described in the first article, (which have been
run and marked by Col. Sullivan,) so far as the Indians claimed the
same, to belong to the United States; and that none of their tribe shall
be permitted to settle or hunt upon any part of it, after the first day
of January, one thousand eight hundred and twenty--six, without special
permission from the superintendent of Indian affairs.

ARTICLE IV. The undersigned chiefs, for themselves, and all parts of the
Ioway tribe, do acknowledge themselves and the said Ioway tribe to be
under the protection of the United States of America, and of no other
sovereign whatsoever; and they also stipulate that the said Ioway tribe
will not hold any treaty with any foreign Powers, individual State, or
with individuals of any State.

ARTICLE V. The United States engage to provide and support a blacksmith
for the Ioway tribe, so long as the President of the United States may
think proper, and to furnish the said tribe with such farming utensils
and cattle, and to employ such persons to aid them in their agriculture,
as the President may deem expedient.

ARTICLE VI. The annuities stipulated to be paid by the second article,
to be paid either in money, merchandise, provisions, or domestic
animals, at the option of the aforesaid tribe; and when the said
annuities, or any part thereof, is paid in merchandise, it is to be
delivered to them at the first cost of the goods at St. Louis, free from
cost of transportation.

ARTICLE VII. This treaty shall take effect, and be obligatory on the
contracting parties, so soon as the same shall be ratified by the
President of the United States, by and with the advise and consent of
the Senate thereof.

_In testimony whereof, the said William Clark, Commissioner as
aforesaid, and the chiefs and headmen of the Ioway tribe of Indians, as
aforesaid, have hereunto set their hands, the day and year first before
written._


   Wm. Clark.

(_Signed, also, by the chiefs and headmen of the Ioway tribe._)


   TREATY WITH THE SIOUX, ETC., AUG. 19, 1825

   _Treaty with the Sioux and Chippewa, Sacs and Fox, Menominie,
   Ioway, Sioux, Winnebago, and a portion of the Ottawa,
   Chippewa, and Potawattomie, Tribes._

The United States of America have seen with much regret, that wars have
for many years been carried on between the Sioux and the Chippewas, and
more recently between the confederated tribes of Sacs and Foxes, and the
Sioux; and also between the Ioways and Sioux; which, if not terminated,
may extend to the other tribes, and involve the Indians upon the
Missouri, the Mississippi, and the Lakes, in general hostilities. In
order, therefore, to promote peace among these tribes, and to establish
boundaries among them and the other tribes who live in their vicinity,
and thereby to remove all causes of future difficulty, the United States
have invited the Chippewa, Sac, and Fox, Menominie, Ioway, Sioux,
Winnebago, and a portion of the Ottowa, Chippewa, and Potawatomie Tribes
of Indians living upon the Illinois, to assemble together, and in a
spirit of mutual conciliation to accomplish these objects; and to aid
therein, have appointed William Clark and Lewis Cass, Commissioners on
their part, who have met the Chiefs, Warriors, and Representatives of
the said tribes, and portions of tribes, at Prairie des Chiens, in the
Territory of Michigan, and after full deliberation, the said tribes, and
portions of tribes, have agreed with the United States, and with one
another, upon the following articles:


ARTICLE I

There shall be a firm and perpetual peace between the Sioux and
Chippewas; between the Sioux and the confederated tribes of Sacs and
Foxes; and between the Ioways and the Sioux.

* * *

ARTICLE III

The Ioways accede to the arrangement between the Sacs and Foxes, and the
Sioux; but it is agreed between the Ioways and the confederated tribes
of the Sacs and Foxes, that the Ioways have a just claim to a portion of
the country between the boundary line described in the next preceding
article, and the Missouri and Mississippi; and that the said Ioways, and
Sacs and Foxes, shall peaceably occupy the same, until some satisfactory
arrangement can be made between them for a division of their respective
claims to country.

* * *

ARTICLE XI

The United States agree, whenever the President may think it necessary
and proper, to convene such of the tribes, either separately or
together, as are interested in the lines left unsettled herein, and to
recommend to them an amicable and final adjustment of their respective
claims, so that the work, now happily begun, may be consummated. It is
agreed, however, that a Council shall be held with the Yancton band of
the Sioux, during the year 1826, to explain to them the stipulations of
this treaty, and to procure their assent thereto, should they be
disposed to give it, and also with the Ottoes, to settle and adjust
their title to any of the country claimed by the Sacs, Foxes, and
Ioways.

* * *

ARTICLE XIII

It is understood by all the tribes, parties hereto, that no tribe shall
hunt within the acknowledged limits of any other without their assent,
but it being the sole object of this arrangement to perpetuate a peace
among them, and amicable relations being now restored, the Chiefs of all
the tribes have expressed a determination, cheerfully to allow a
reciprocal right of hunting on the lands of one another, permission
being first asked and obtained, as before provided for.


ARTICLE XIV

Should any causes of difficulty hereafter unhappily arise between any of
the tribes, parties hereunto, it is agreed that the other tribes shall
interpose their good offices to remove such difficulties; and also that
the government of the United States may take such measures as they may
deem proper, to effect the same object.


ARTICLE XV

This treaty shall be obligatory on the tribes, parties hereto, from and
after the date hereof, and on the United States, from and after its
ratification by the government thereof.


TREATY WITH THE SACS AND FOXES, ETC., JULY 15, 1830.[94]

[At Prairie du Chien]

   _Articles of a treaty made and concluded by William Clark,
   Superintendent of Indian Affairs and Willoughby Morgan, Col.
   of the United States 1st Regt. Infantry, Commissioners on
   behalf of the United States on the one part, and the
   undersigned Deputations of the Confederated Tribes of the Sacs
   and Foxes; the Medawah--Kanton, Wahpacoota, Wahpeton and
   Sissetong Bands or Tribes of Sioux; the Omahas, Ioways, Ottoes
   and Missourias on the other part._

* * *

ARTICLE IV

In consideration of the cessions and relinquishments made in the first,
second, and third articles of this Treaty, the United States agree to
pay to the Sacs, three thousand dollars,--and to the Foxes three thousand
dollars; To the Sioux of the Mississippi two thousand dollars;--To the
Yancton and Santie Bands of Sioux three thousand dollars;--To the Omahas,
two thousand five hundred dollars;--To the Ioways two thousand five
hundred dollars;--To the Ottoes and Missourias two thousand five hundred
dollars, and to the Sacs of the Missouri River five hundred dollars; to
be paid annually for ten successive years at such place, or places on
the Mississippi or Missouri, as may be most convenient to said Tribes,
either in money, merchandise, or domestic animals, at their option; and
when said annuities or any portion of them shall be paid in merchandise,
the same is to be delivered to them at the first cost of the goods at
St. Louis free of transportation. And the United States further agree to
make to the said tribes and Bands, the following allowances for the
period of ten years, and as long thereafter as the President of the
United States may think necessary and proper, in addition to the sums
herein before stipulated to be paid them; that is to say; To the Bands
of the Sioux mentioned in the third article, one Blacksmith at the
expense of the United States, and the necessary tools; also instruments
for agricultural purposes, and iron and steel to the amount of seven
hundred dollars;--To the Yancton and Santie Bands of Sioux, one
Blacksmith at the expense of the United States, and the necessary tools,
also instruments for agricultural purposes to the amount of four hundred
dollars;--To the Omahas one Blacksmith at the expense of the United
States, and the necessary tools, also instruments for agricultural
purposes to the amount of five hundred dollars;--To the Ioways an
assistant Blacksmith at the expense of the United States, also
instruments for agricultural purposes to the amount of six hundred
dollars;--To the Ottoes and Missourias one Blacksmith at the expense of
the United States, and the necessary tools, also instruments for
agricultural purposes to the amount of five hundred dollars; and to the
Sacs of the Missouri River, one Blacksmith at the expense of the United
States and the necessary tools; also instruments for agricultural
purposes to the amount of two hundred dollars.


ARTICLE X

The Omahas, Ioways and Ottoes, for themselves, and in behalf of the
Yancton and Santie Bands of Sioux, having earnestly requested that they
might be permitted to make some provision for their half--breeds, and
particularly that they might bestow upon them the tract of country
within the following limits, to--wit; Beginning at the mouth of the
Little Ne--mohaw River, and running up the main channel of said River to
a point which will be ten miles from its mouth in a direct line; from
thence in a direct line, to strike the Grand Ne--mohaw ten miles above
its mouth, in a direct line (the distance between the two Ne--mohaws
being about twenty miles)--thence down said River to its mouth; thence
up, and with the Meanders of the Missouri River to the point of
beginning, it is agreed that the half--breeds of said Tribes and Bands
may be suffered to occupy said tract of land; holding it in the same
manner, and by the same title that other Indian titles are held: but the
President of the United States may hereafter assign to any of the said
half--breeds, to be held by him or them in fee simple, any portion of
said tract not exceeding a section, of six hundred and forty acres to
each individual. And this provision shall extend to the cession made by
the Sioux in the preceding Article.


ARTICLE XI

The reservation of land mentioned in the preceding Article having
belonged to the Ottoes, and having been exclusively ceded by them; it is
agreed that the Omahas, the Ioways and the Yanckton and Santie Bands of
Sioux shall pay out of their annuities to the said Ottoe Tribe, for the
period of ten years, Three hundred Dollars annually; of which sum the
Omahas shall pay one hundred Dollars, the Ioways one hundred Dollars,
and the Yancton and Santie Bands one hundred dollars.


   TREATY WITH THE IOWA, ETC., SEPT. 17, 1836

   _Articles of a treaty, made and concluded at Fort Leavenworth,
   on the Missouri river, between William Clark, Superintendent
   of Indian Affairs, on the part of the United States, of the
   one part, and the undersigned chiefs, warriors, and
   counsellors of the Ioway tribe and the band of Sacks and Foxes
   of the Missouri, (residing west of the State of Missouri,) in
   behalf of their respective tribes, of the other part._


ARTICLE 1

By the first article of the treaty of Prairie du Chien, held the
fifteenth day of July eighteen hundred and thirty, with the confederated
tribes of Sacks, Foxes, Ioways, Omahaws, Missourias, Ottoes, and Sioux,
the country ceded to the United States by that treaty, is to be assigned
and allotted under the direction of the President of the United States
to the tribes living thereon, or to such other tribes as the President
may locate thereon for hunting and other purposes.--And whereas it is
further represented to us the chiefs, warriors, and counsellors of the
Ioways and Sack and Fox band aforesaid, to be desirable that the lands
lying between the State of Missouri and the Missouri river, should be
attached to and become a part of said State, and the Indian title
thereto, be entirely extinguished; but that, notwithstanding, as these
lands compose a part of the country embraced by the provisions of said
first article of the treaty aforesaid, the stipulations thereof will be
strictly observed until the assent of the Indians interested is given to
the proposed measures.

Now we the chiefs, warriors, and counsellors of the Ioways, and Missouri
band of Sacks and Foxes, fully understanding the subject, and well
satisfied from the local position of the lands in question, that they
never can be made available for Indian purposes, and that an attempt to
place an Indian population on them, must inevitably lead to collisions
with the citizens of the United States; and further believing that the
extension of the State line in the direction indicated would have a
happy effect, by presenting a natural boundary between the whites and
Indians; and willing, moreover, to give the United States a renewed
evidence of our attachment and friendship, do hereby for ourselves, and
on behalf of our respective tribes, (having full power and authority to
this effect,) forever cede, relinquish, and quit claim, to the United
States, all our right, title, and interest of whatsoever nature in, and
to, the lands lying between the State of Missouri and the Missouri
river; and do freely and fully exonerate the United States from any
guarantee; condition or limitation, expressed or implied, under the
treaty of Prairie du Chien aforesaid, or otherwise, as to the entire and
absolute disposition of the said lands, fully authorizing the United
States to do with the same whatever shall seem expedient or necessary.

As a proof of the continued friendship and liberality of the United
States towards the Ioways and band of Sacks and Foxes of the Missouri,
and as an evidence of the sense entertained for the good will manifested
by said tribes to the citizens and Government of the United States, as
evinced in the preceding cession or relinquishment, the undersigned,
William Clark, agrees on behalf of the United States, to pay as a
present to the said Ioways and band of Sacks and Foxes, seven thousand
five hundred dollars in money, the receipt of which they hereby
acknowledge.


ARTICLE 2

As the said tribes of Ioways and Sacks and Foxes, have applied for a
small piece of land, south of the Missouri, for a permanent home, on
which they can settle, and request the assistance of the Government of
the United States to place them on this land, in a situation at least
equal to that they now enjoy on the land ceded by them: Therefore I,
William Clark, Superintendent of Indian Affairs, do further agree on
behalf of the United States, to assign to the Ioway tribe, and Missouri
band of Sacks and Foxes, the small strip of land on the south side of
the Missouri river, lying between the Kickapoo northern boundary line
and the Grand Nemahar river, and extending from the Missouri back and
westwardly with the said Kickapoo line and the Grand Nemahar, making
four hundred sections; to be divided between the said Ioways and
Missouri band of Sacks and Foxes, the lower half to the Sacks and Foxes,
and the upper half to the Ioways.


ARTICLE 3

The Ioways and Missouri band of Sacks and Foxes further agree, that they
will move and settle on the lands assigned them in the above article, as
soon as arrangements can be made by them; and the undersigned William
Clark, in behalf of the United States, agrees, that as soon as the above
tribes have selected a site for their villages, and places for their
fields, and moved to them, to erect for the Ioways five comfortable
houses, to enclose and break up for them two hundred acres of ground; to
furnish them with a farmer, a blacksmith, schoolmaster, and interpreter,
as long as the President of the United States may deem proper; to
furnish them such, agricultural implements as may be necessary, for five
years; to furnish them with rations for one year, commencing at the time
of their arrival at their new homes; to furnish them with one
ferry--boat; to furnish them with one hundred cows and calves and five
bulls, and one hundred stock hogs when they require them; to furnish
them with a mill and assist in removing them, to the extent of five
hundred dollars. And to erect for the Sacks and Foxes three comfortable
houses; to enclose and break up for them two hundred acres of ground; to
furnish them, with a farmer, blacksmith, schoolmaster, and interpreter,
as long as the President of the United States may deem proper; to
furnish them with such agricultural implements as may be necessary, for
five years; to furnish them with rations for one year, commencing at the
time of their arrival at their new home; to furnish them with one
ferry--boat; to furnish them with one hundred cows and calves and five
bulls, one hundred stock hogs when they require them; to furnish them
with a mill; and to assist in moving them, to the extent of four hundred
dollars.


ARTICLE 4

This treaty shall be obligatory on the tribes, parties hereto, from and
after the date hereof, and on the United States from and after its
ratification by the Government thereof.


TREATY WITH THE IOWA, NOV. 23, 1837


   _Articles of a treaty made at the city of Saint Louis, between
   Joshua Pilcher, thereto specially authorized by the President
   of the United States, and the Ioway Indians, by their chiefs
   and delegates._


ARTICLE 1ST

The Ioway Indians cede to the United States all the right and interest
in the land ceded by the treaty, concluded with them and other tribes on
the 15th of July 1830, which they might be entitled to claim, by virtue
of the phraseology employed in the second article of said treaty.


ARTICLE 2D

In consideration of the cession contained in the preceding article, the
United States stipulate to pay them two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500) in horses, goods and presents, upon their signing this treaty
in the city of Saint Louis.


ARTICLE 3D

The expenses of this negotiation and of the chiefs and delegates signing
this treaty to the city of Washington and to their homes to be paid by
the United States.


ARTICLE 4TH

This treaty to be binding upon the contracting parties when the same
shall be ratified by the United States.


TREATY WITH THE IOWA, OCT. 19, 1838

   _Articles of a treaty made at the Great Nemowhaw sub--agency
   between John Dougherty Agent of Indian Affairs on the part of
   the United States, being specially authorized, and the chiefs
   and headmen of the Ioway tribe of Indians for themselves, and
   on the part of their tribe._


ARTICLE 1ST

The Ioway tribe of Indians cede to the United States,

_First._ All right or interest in the country between the Missouri and
Mississippi rivers, and the boundary between the Sacs and Foxes, and
Sioux, described in the second article of the treaty made with these and
other tribes, on the 19th of August, 1825, to the full extent to which
said claim is recognized in the third article of said treaty, and all
interest or claim by virtue of the provisions of any treaties since made
by the United States with the Sacs and Foxes of the Mississippi.

_Second._ All claims or interest under the treaties of August 4th 1824,
July 15th 1830, and September 17th 1836, except so much of the last
mentioned treaty as secures to them two hundred sections of land the
erection of five comfortable houses, to enclose and break up for them
two hundred acres of ground to furnish them with a ferry boat, one
hundred cows and calves, five bulls, one hundred head of stock hogs a
mill and interpreter.


ARTICLE 2D

In consideration of the cession contained in the preceding article, the
United States agree to the following stipulations on their part.

_First._ To pay to the said Ioway tribe of Indians the sum of one
hundred and fifty--seven thousand five hundred ($157,500) dollars.

_Second._ To invest said sum of one hundred and fifty--seven thousand
five hundred (157,500) dollars, and to guaranty them an annual income of
not less than five per cent. thereon during the existence of their
tribe.

_Third._ To set apart annually such amount of said income as the chiefs
and headmen of said tribe may require, for the support of a blacksmith
shop agricultural assistance, and education to be expended under the
direction of the President of the United States.

_Fourth._ To pay out of said income to Jeffrey Derroin interpreter for
said tribe for services rendered, the sum of fifty dollars annually
during his natural life the balance of said income shall be delivered,
at the cost of the United States, to said tribe of Ioway Indians in
money or merchandise, at their own discretion, at such time and place as
the President may direct, _Provided always_ That the payment shall be
made each year in the month of October.


ARTICLE 3D

The United States further agree in addition to the above consideration
to cause to be erected ten houses at such place or places on their own
land as said Ioways may select, of the following description (viz.) each
house to be ten feet high from bottom sill to top plate eighteen by
twenty feet in the clear the roof to be well sheeted and shingled, the
gable ends to be weather boarded a good floor above and below, one door
and two windows complete, one chimney of stone or brick, and the whole
house to be underpinned.


ARTICLE 4TH

This treaty to be binding upon the contracting parties when the same
shall be ratified by the United States.


TREATY WITH THE IOWA, [MAY 17,] 1854

   _Articles of agreement and convention made and concluded at
   the city of Washington, this seventeenth day of May, one
   thousand eight hundred and fifty--four, by George W. Manypenny,
   commissioner on the part of the United States, and the
   following--named delegates of the Ioway tribe of Indians, viz:
   Nan--chee--ning--a, or No Heart; Shoon--ty--ing--a, or Little Wolf;
   Wah--moon--a--ka, or the Man who Steals; and Nar--ge--ga--rash, or
   British; they being thereto duly authorized by said tribe._


ARTICLE 1

The Ioway tribe of Indians hereby cede, relinquish, and convey to the
United States, all their right, title, and interest in and to the
country, with the exception hereinafter named, which was assigned to
them by the treaty concluded with their tribe and the Missouri band of
Sacs and Foxes, by William Clark, superintendent of Indian affairs, on
the seventeenth of September, one thousand eight hundred and thirty--six,
being the upper half of the tract described in the second article
thereof, as "the small strip of land on the south side of the Missouri
River, lying between the Kickapoo northern boundary--line and the Grand
Nemahaw River, and extending from the Missouri back westwardly with the
said Kickapoo line and the Grand Nemahaw, making four hundred sections;
to be divided between the said Ioways and Missouri band of Sacs and
Foxes; the lower half to the Sacs and Foxes, the upper half to the
Ioways," but they except and reserve of said country, so much thereof as
is embraced within and designated by the following metes and bounds,
viz: Beginning at the mouth of the Great Nemahaw River where it empties
into the Missouri; thence down the Missouri River to the mouth of
Noland's Creek; thence due south one mile; thence due west to the south
fork of the Nemahaw River; thence down the said fork with its meanders
to the Great Nemahaw River, and thence with the meanders of said river
to the place of beginning, which country, it is hereby agreed, shall be
the future and permanent home of the Ioway Indians.


ARTICLE 2

In consideration of the cession made in the preceding article, the
United States agree to pay in the manner hereinafter prescribed, to the
Ioway Indians, all the moneys received from the sales of the lands which
are stipulated in the third article hereof, to be surveyed and
sold--after deducting therefrom the costs of surveying, managing, and
selling the same.


ARTICLE 3

The United States agree to have surveys made of the country ceded by the
Ioways in article first in the same manner that the public lands are
surveyed, and as soon as it can conveniently be done; and the
President, after the surveys shall have been made and approved, shall
proceed to offer said surveyed land for sale, at public auction, being
governed therein by the laws of the United States respecting sales of
public lands; and such of said lands as may not be sold at public sales,
shall be subject to private entry in the manner that private entries are
made of United States land; and all the land remaining unsold after
being for three years subject to private entry at the minimum Government
price, may by act of Congress, be graduated and reduced in price until
the whole is disposed of, proper regard being had, in making such
reduction, to the interests of the Ioways and the speedy settlement of
the country. Until after the said land shall have been surveyed, and the
surveys approved, no white persons or citizens shall be permitted to
make thereon any location or settlement; and the provisions of the act
of Congress, approved on the third day of March, one thousand eight
hundred and seven, relating to lands ceded to the United States, shall,
so far as they are applicable, be extended over the lands herein ceded.


ARTICLE 4

It being understood that the present division--line between the Ioways
and the Sacs and Foxes of Missouri, as run by Isaac McCoy, will, when
the surveys are made, run diagonally through many of the sections,
cutting them into fractions; it is agreed that the sections thus cut by
said line, commencing at the junction of the Wolf with the Missouri
River, shall be deemed and taken as part of the land herein before ceded
and directed to be sold for the benefit of the Ioways, until the
quantity thus taken, including the before--recited reservation, and all
the full sections north of said line, shall amount to two hundred
sections of land. And should the Sacs and Foxes of Missouri consent to a
change of their residence and be so located by the United States as to
occupy any portion of the land herein ceded and directed to be sold for
the benefit of the Ioways, west of the tract herein reserved, the Ioways
hereby agree to the same, and consent to such an arrangement, upon the
condition that a quantity of land equal to that which may be thus
occupied by the Sacs and Foxes, and of as good quality, shall be set
apart for them out of the country now occupied by the last--named tribe,
contiguous to said division--line, and sold for their benefit as
hereinbefore provided.


ARTICLE 5

As the receipts from the sales of the lands cannot now be determined, it
is agreed that the whole subject shall be referred to the President of
the United States, who may, from time to time, prescribe how much of the
proceeds thereof shall be paid out to the Ioway people, and the time and
mode of such payment, and also how much shall be invested in safe and
profitable stocks, the principal of which to remain unimpaired, and the
interest to be applied annually for the civilization, education, and
religious culture of the Ioways and such other objects of a beneficial
character as may be proper and essential to their well--being and
prosperity: provided, that if necessary, Congress may, from time to
time, by law, make such regulations in regard to the funds arising from
the sale of said lands, and the application thereof for the benefit of
the Ioways, as may in the wisdom of that body seem just and expedient.


ARTICLE 6

The President may cause the country the Ioways have reserved for their
future home, to be surveyed, at their expense, and in the same way as
the public lands are surveyed, and assign to each person or family such
portion thereof as their industry and ability to manage business affairs
may, in his opinion, render judicious and proper; and Congress may
hereafter provide for the issuing to such persons, patents for the same,
with guards and restrictions for their protection in the possession and
enjoyment thereof.


ARTICLE 7

Appreciating the importance and the benefit derived from the mission
established among them by the board of foreign missions of the
Presbyterian Church, the Ioways hereby grant unto the said board a tract
of three hundred and twenty acres of land, to be so located as to
include the improvements at the mission, and also a tract of one hundred
and sixty acres of timbered land, to be selected by some agent of the
board from the legal subdivisions of the surveyed land; and the
President shall issue a patent or patents for the same, to such person
or persons as said board may direct. They further grant to John B. Roy,
their interpreter, a tract of three hundred and twenty acres of land, to
be selected by him in "Wolf's Grove," for which the President shall also
issue a patent.


ARTICLE 8

The debts of Indians contracted in their private dealings as
individuals, whether to traders or otherwise, shall not be paid out of
the general fund.


ARTICLE 9

As some time must elapse before any benefit can be derived from the
proceeds of the sale of their land, and as it is desirable that the
Ioways should at once engage in agricultural pursuits and in making
improvements on the tract hereinbefore reserved for them, it is hereby
agreed that, of the fund of one hundred and fifty--seven thousand five
hundred dollars, set apart to be invested by the second clause of the
second article of the treaty concluded on the nineteenth day of October,
one thousand eight hundred and thirty--eight, a sum not exceeding one
hundred thousand dollars shall be paid to the Indians, or expended under
the direction of the President for the erection of houses, breaking and
fencing lands, purchasing stock, farming utensils, seeds, and such other
articles as may be necessary for their comfort. Fifty thousand dollars,
or so much thereof as may be deemed expedient, to be paid during the
year commencing on the first of October, one thousand eight hundred and
fifty--four; and the other fifty thousand dollars, or so much thereof as
shall be deemed expedient, to be paid during the year commencing on the
first of October, one thousand eight hundred and fifty--five. The residue
of said fund of one hundred and fifty--seven thousand five hundred
dollars on hand after the payments herein provided for have been made
shall remain as a trust fund, the interest upon which, as well as the
interest that may have accrued on the portion drawn out, shall be
applied, under the direction of the President, to educational or other
beneficial purposes among the Ioways.


ARTICLE 10

It is agreed that all roads and highways laid out by authority of law
shall have a right of way through the lands herein reserved, on the same
terms as are provided by law when roads and highways are made through
the lands of citizens of the United States; and railroad companies, when
the lines of their roads necessarily pass through the lands of the
Ioways, shall have right of way on the payment of a just compensation
therefor in money.


ARTICLE 11

The Ioways promise to renew their efforts to suppress the introduction
and use of ardent spirits in their country, to encourage industry,
thrift, and morality, and by every possible effort to promote their
advancement in civilization. They desire to be at peace with all men,
and they bind themselves to commit no depredation or wrong upon either
Indians or citizens; and whenever difficulties arise they will abide by
the laws of the United States, in such cases made and provided, as they
expect to be protected and to have their rights vindicated by them.


ARTICLE 12

The Ioway Indians release the United States from all claims and demands
of every kind and description arising under former treaties, and agree
to remove themselves within six months after the ratification of this
instrument, to the lands herein reserved for their homes; in
consideration whereof, the United States agree to pay to said Indians
five thousand dollars--two thousand of which with such portion of
balances of former appropriations of interest--fund as may not now be
necessary under specific heads, may be expended in the settlement of
their affairs preparatory to removal.


ARTICLE 13

The object of this instrument being to advance the interests of the
Ioway people, it is agreed, if it prove insufficient, from causes which
cannot now be foreseen, to effect these ends, that the President may, by
and with the advice and consent of the Senate, adopt such policy in the
management of their affairs, as, in his judgment, may be most beneficial
to them; or Congress may hereafter make such provision by law as
experience shall prove to be necessary.


ARTICLE 14

This instrument shall be obligatory on the contracting parties whenever
the same shall be ratified by the President and the Senate of the United
States.


TREATY WITH THE SAUK AND FOXES, ETC., [MAR. 6,] 1861

   _Articles of agreement and convention made and concluded at
   the office of the Great Nemaha agency, Nebraska Territory, on
   the sixth day of March, A. D. one thousand eight hundred and
   sixty--one, by and between Daniel Vanderslice, U. S. Indian
   agent, on the part of the United States, and the
   following--named delegates of the Sacs and Foxes of Missouri,_
   _viz: Pe--ta--ok--a--ma, Ne--sour--quoit, Mo--less, and
   Se--se--ah--kee; and the following--named delegates of the Iowa
   tribe, viz: No--heart, Nag--ga--rash, Mah--hee, To--hee,
   Tah--ra--hee, Thur--o--mony, and White Horse; they being duly
   authorized thereto by their respective tribes._


ARTICLE 3

The Iowa tribe of Indians, parties to this agreement, hereby cede,
relinquish, and convey to the United States, for the use and benefit of
the Sacs and Foxes of Missouri, for their permanent home, all that part
of their present reservation lying and being west of Nohearts Creek, and
bounded as follows, viz: Beginning at a point where the southern line of
the present Iowa reserve crosses Nohearts Creek; thence with said line
to the south fork of the Nemaha, (commonly known as Walnut Creek;)
thence down the middle of said south fork, with the meanders thereof, to
its mouth, and to a point in the middle of the Great Nemaha River;
thence down the middle of said river to a point opposite the mouth of
Nohearts Creek; and thence, in a southerly direction with the middle of
said Nohearts Creek, to the place of beginning. And it is hereby
understood and agreed that, in full consideration for said cession, the
United States shall hold in trust, for the use and benefit of the Iowas,
the one--half of the net proceeds of the sales of the lands described in
the second article of this agreement, and interest thereon, at the rate
of five per centum per annum, shall be paid to the Iowa tribe in the
same manner as their annuities are paid under the treaty of May 17,
1854. The reservation herein described shall be surveyed and set apart
for the exclusive use and benefit of the Sacs and Foxes of Missouri, and
the remainder of the Iowa lands shall be the tribal reserve of said Iowa
Indians for their exclusive use and benefit.

* * *

ARTICLE 5

In order to encourage education among the aforesaid tribes of Indians,
it is hereby agreed that the United States shall expend the sum of one
thousand dollars for the erection of a suitable school--house, and
dwelling--house for the school teacher, for the benefit of the Sacs and
Foxes, and also the additional sum of two hundred dollars per annum for
school purposes, so long as the President of the United States may deem
advisable. And for the benefit of the Iowa tribe of Indians there shall
be expended, in like manner, at the discretion of the President, the sum
of three hundred dollars per annum, for school purposes, which two
last--mentioned sums shall be paid out of the funds to be appropriated
for the civilization of Indians.

* * *

ARTICLE 8

It is hereby understood and agreed by the contracting parties hereto
that the stipulations of the treaty with the Sacs and Foxes of Missouri
of May 18th, 1854, and the treaty with the Iowa Indians of the 17th of
May, 1854, which may not be inconsistent with these articles of
convention, shall have full force and effect upon the contracting
parties hereto.

* * *

ARTICLE 10

The Secretary of the Interior may expend a sum not exceeding three
thousand five hundred dollars, ($3,500,) out of the proceeds of the
sales of said lands, at any time he may deem it advisable, for the
purpose of erecting a toll--bridge across the Great Nemaha River, at or
near Roy's Ferry, for the use of the Iowa Indians; and a like sum of
three thousand five hundred dollars, ($3,500,), out of the proceeds of
the sales of said lands, for the purpose of erecting a toll--bridge
across the Great Nemaha River, at or near Wolf Village, for the use of
the Sacs and Foxes of Missouri.


APPENDIX C


IOWA SYNONYMY

AGONES.--Boudinot, _Star in the West_, 125, 1816.

AGOUAIS.--De Ligney (1726) in _Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll._, 1, 22, 1854.

AGOUAL.--Chauvignerie (1736) quoted by Schoolcraft, _Ind. Tribes_, III,
557, 1853.

AGOUES.--Hutchins (1764), _ibid._

AH--E--O--WAR.--_Orig. Jour. Lewis and Clark_, VI, 91, 1905.

AIAOUA.--Perrot (1689), _Mem._, 196, 1864.

AIAOUAIS.--_Ibid._, index.

AIAOUEZ.--Jefferys, _French Dom. in Am._, 1, 139, 1761.

AIAUWAY.--_Orig. Jour. Lewis and Clark_ (1804), 1, 61, 1904.

AIAVVIS.--Le Sueur quoted by Ramsey in _Minn. Hist. Soc. Coll._, 1, 45,
1872.

AIEWAYS.--_Orig. Jour. Lewis and Clark_ (1804), 1, 45, 1904.

AIJOUES.--Schoolcraft, _Ind. Tribes_, III, 522, 1853.

AINONES.--Membre(1680) quoted by Hayden, _Ethnog. and Philol. Mo. Vol._,
445, 1862.

AINOVES.--Hennepin, _New Discov._, 132, 1698.

AIOAEZ.--Coues, _Lewis and Clark Exped._, 1, 19, note, 43, 1893.

AIOUEZ.--Charlevoix (1723) in Margry, _Dec._, VI, 526, 1886.

AIOUNOUEA.--Hennepin (1680--82) in Margry, _Dec._, 11, 258, 1877.

AIOWAIS.--Pike, _Trav._, 134, 1811.

AISNOUS.--McKenny and Hall, _Ind. Tribes_, III, 80, 1584.

AJAOUEZ.--Jefferys, _Fr. Dom. Am._, pt. 1, map 1, 1761.

AJOUAS.--Smet, _Miss. de l'Oregon_, 108, 1848.

AJOUES.--Bowles, _map Am._, ca. 1750.

AJOUEZ.--Perrot, _Mem._, index, 1864.

ANJOUES.--Buchanan, _N. Am. Inds._, 155, 1824.

AOeAIS.--_N. Y. Doc. Col. Hist._, _X_, 630, 1858.

AONAYS.--Smet, _Letters_, 38, note, 1843 (misprint).

AOUAS.--Cabeca de Vaca misquoted by Schoolcraft, _Ind. Tribes_, II, 37,
1852 (error).

AVAUWAIS.--Lewis and Clark, _Trav._, 14, 1807.

AVOY.--Neill, _Hist Minn._, 200, 1858.

AVOYS.--_Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll._, 1, 32, 1854.

AYAHWA.--Coues, _Lewis and Clark Exped._, 1, 20, note, 1893.

AYAUAIS.--Drake, _Bk. Inds._, VI, 1848.

AYAUVAI.--Coues, _Lewis and Clark Exped._, 1, 19, note, 1893.

AYAUWAIS.--Lewis and Clark, _Discov._, 17, 1806.

AYAUWAS.--Lapham, Blossom, and Dousman, _Inds. Wis._, 3, 1870.

AYAUWAUS.--_Orig. Jour. Lewis and Clark_, 1, 91, 1904.

AYAUWAY.--_Ibid._, 45.

AYAVOIS.--La Harpe and Le Sueur (1699) quoted by Long, _Exped. St.
Peter's R._, II, 320, 1824.

AYAWAI.--Coues, _Lewis and Clark_, 1, 19, note, 1893.

AYAWAYS.--Lewis and Clark, _Trav._, II, 442, 1814.

AYEOUAIS.--Neill, _Hist. Minn._, 197, 1858.

AYE8AIS.--_N. Y. Doc. Col Hist._, X, 608, 1858.

AYOA.--Martin, _Hist. La._, 301, 1882.

AYOES.--Perrot (1689) in _Minn. Hist. Soc. Coll._, II, pt. 2, 24, 1864.

AYOES.--ditto in _Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll._, XVI, 14, 1902.

AYOOIS.--Bienville (1722) in Margry, _Dec._, VI, 407, 1886.

AYOOUAIS.--Beauharnois and Hocquart (1731) in Margry, _Dec._, VI, 570,
1886.

AYOOUES.--Iberville (1702) quoted by Neill, _Hist. Minn._, 172, 1858.

AYO8OIS.--_N. Y. Doc. Col. Hist._, IX, 1055, 1855.

AYOUA.--Adelung, _Mithridates_, III, 271, 1816.

AYOUAS.--See Chauvignerie's _Report of Census, etc._, 1736.

AYOUAHS.--Domenech, _Deserts N. Am._, II, 34, 1860.

AYOUES.--Neill, _Hist. Minn._, 173, 1858.

AYOUEZ.--Lamothe Cadillac (1695) in Margry, _Dec._, V, 124, 1883.

AYOUWA.--Pike, _Trav._, _map_, 1811.

AYOUWAIS.--Lewis and Clark, _Discov._, 49, 1806.

AYOU--WAYS.--_Ibid._, 29.

AYOVAI.--Coues, _Lewis and Clark Exped._, 1, 20, note, 1893.

AYOVOIS.--Bienville, (1722) in Margry, _Dec._, VI, 396, 1886.

AYOWA.--Gatschet, _Kaw MS. vocab._, B. A. E., 27, 1878 (Kansa name).

AYOWAS.--Maximilian, _Travels_, 507, 1843.

AYOWAY.--Lewis and Clark, _Exped._, 1, 487, 1817.

AYUHBA.--Riggs, _Dak. Gramm. and Dict._, 278, 1852.

AYUHUWAHAK.--Gatschet, _Fox MS._, B. A. E., (Fox name).

AYUKBA.--Williamson in _Minn. Hist. Soc. Coll._, 1, 299, 1872.

DUSTY--NOSE.--Schoolcraft, _Ind. Tribes_, III, 262, 1853.

HO--WAH.--Ramsey in _Ind. Aff. Rep._, 1849, 74, 1850, (Mdewakanton name).

IAWAI.--Coues, _Lewis and Clark Exped._, 1, 20, note, 1893.

IAWAS.--La Harpe and Le Sueur (1699) quoted by Long, _Exped. S. Peter's
R._, II, 320, 1824.

IAWAYS.--_Orig. Jour. Lewis and Clark_, VI, 91, 1905.

I--HO--WA.--Bradford's _Notes on the Northwest_, 1846.

IHOWAY.--_Sen. Doc. 21_, 18th Cong., 2d sess., 5, 1825.

IOEWAIG.--Tanner, _Narr._, 316, 1830 (Ottawa name).

IOWA.--Pike, _Trav._, 134, 1811.

IOWAY.--Pike, _Exped._, 112, 1810.

IYAKHBA.--Williamson in _Minn. Geol. Rep._ for 1884, 106 (Santee Dakota
name).

IYAKHWA.--_Ibid._ (Teton name).

IYUHBA.--Riggs, _Dak. Gram, and Dict._, 278, 1852 (trans. 'sleepy ones').

JOWAI.--_Ann de la Propag. de la Foi_, III, 569, 1828.

JOWAS.--Pike, _Trav._, 123, 1811.

JOWAYS.--Schermerhorn (1812) in _Mass Hist. Soc. Coll._, 2nd s. II, 39,
1814.

MAQUDE.--Dorsey, _Cegiha MS. Dict._, B. A. E. 1878. (Omaha and Ponca
name).

MINOWAS.--Rafinesque in Marshall, _Hist. Ky._, I, 28, 1824, (confounding
Iowa with Missouri).

NADOESSI MASCOUTEINS.--_Jes. Rel._ 1676--77, Thwaites ed., LX, 203, 1900.

NADOUESSI--MASKOUTENS.--Perrot, _Mem._, index, 1864.

NADOUESSIOUX DES PRAIRIES.--_Ibid._, 237.

NADOUESSIOUX MASKOUTENS.--_Minn. Hist. Soc Coll._, II, pt. 2, 30, note,
1864 (Sioux of the Prairies: Algonkin name).

NE PERSA.--_Orig. Jour. Lewis and Clark_, VI, 91, 1905, (i. e., Nez
Perces; given as traders' nickname).

OUIAS.--_Am. State Papers, Ind. Off._, 1, 93, 1832.

OVAS.--Barcia, _Ensayo_, 238, 1723.

OYOA.--Du Lac, _Voy. dans les Louisianes_, 232, 1805.

PA--HO--CHA.--Hamilton in _Trans. Neb. State Hist. Soc._, 1, 47, 1885,
(trans. 'dusty men').

PA--HO--DJE.--Maximilian, _Trav._, 507, 1843 (trans. 'dust--noses').

PA--HO--JA.--Long, _Exped. Rocky Mts._, 1, 339, 1823 (trans. 'gray snow').

PA--H8TET.--Marquette (1673) in Shea, _Discov._, 268, _map_, 1852.

PAHUCAE.--Hamilton and Irvin, _Ioway Gram._, 17, 1848.

PA--HU--CHA.--Schoolcraft, _Ind. Tribes_, III, 262, 1853.

PA--KUH--THA.--Morgan, _Anc. Soc._, 156, 1877.

PAOTE.--La Salle (1682) in Margry, _Dec._, 11, 215, 1877.

PAOUTEES.--La Harpe, from Le Sueur's _Jour._ (1700) in Shea, _Early
Voy._, 93, 1861.

PAOUTES.--Le Sueur (1700) in Margry, _Dec._, VI, 70, 1886.

PAOUTEZ.--Jefferys, _Am. Atlas_, _map_ 5, 1776.

PAQOCTE.--Dorsey in _Trans. Anthrop. Soc._, Wash., 11, 10, 1883.

PA--QO--TCE.--Dorsey, _Kansa MS. vocab._, B. A. E., 1882 (Kansa name).

PA--QU--TE.--Dorsey, _Kwa--pa. MS. vocab._, B. A. E., 1881, (Quapaw name).

PA--QUtSE.--Dorsey, _Osage MS. vocab._, B. A. E., 1883 (Osage name).

PASHOHAN.--Gatschet, _Pawnee MS._, B. A. E., (Pawnee name).

PASSINCHAN.--Doc. 1720 quoted by Bandelier in _Arch. Inst. Pap._, V, 203,
1890.

PAUHOOCHEES.--McKenny and Hall, _Ind. Tribes_, II, 209, 1854.

PAXODSHE.--Gatschet, _Kaw MS. vocab._, B. A. E., 27, 1878 (Kansa name).

PIERCED NOSES. Long, _Exped. Rocky Mts._, 1, 339, 1823.

WA--QO TC.--Dorsey, _Winnebago MS. vocab._, B. A. E., 1886 (Winnebago
name).

YAHOWA.--Beltrami, _Pilgrimage_, II, 151, 1828.

YOWAYS.--De l'Isle, _Map of La._, in Neill, _Hist. Minn._, 164, 1858.

YUAHES.--Iberville (1700) in Margry, _Dec._, IV, 440, 1880 (identical?).

ZAIVOVOIS.--Haldimand, according to Catlin, quoted by Donaldson in
_Smithson. Rep._ for 1885, pt. 2, 145, 1886.


APPENDIX D


A list of the names of some of the more prominent members of the Iowa
tribe, excluding half--breeds.

(Compiled from various sources)


   HBROCKANIE

     Laws and Treaties (p. 396, vol. I)


   BIG EAR

     Laws and Treaties (p. 396, vol. I)


   BIG EAR, Thereasa

     Laws and Treaties (p. 396, vol. I)


   BIG NECK (See Moa--Na--Hon--Ga)


   CORSAIR A papoose

     Catlin, Fourteen Ioway Indians


   CRANE

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (pp. 141--146, vol. I)


   EL LADRON (the robber)

     (See Wa--cha--mon--ya)


   HARD HEART

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (p. 85, vol. II)


   HE--WA--THO--CHA (One who sheds his hair)

     Fulton, Red Men of Iowa


   INTHEHONE (The Big Axe)

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (pp. 141--146, vol. I)


   "IOWAY JIM" or Major Ketcher

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (pp. 157--160, vol. I)


   KIS--TOM--IE--a woman

     Laws and Treaties (p. 396, vol. I)

   KOON--ZA--YA--ME (Female war Eagle sailing)

     Catlin, Fourteen Ioway Indians


   LE VOLEUR (A Chief)

     Catlin, Fourteen Ioway Indians


   MA--HAS--KAH (White Cloud)

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (pp. 141--146, vol. I)

     (Occasionally spelled Ma--hos--kah, see the treaty of 1824)


   MA--HAS--KAH (Young)

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (pp. 151--154, vol. I)


   MAH--HEE

     Treaty of 1861


   MAH--NE--HAH--NAH (Great Walker)

     Rhees, Smithsonian Institution, (p. 57) Treaty of 1824


   MAUHOOSKAN (The White Cloud)

     Maximilian Travels, vol. III (Clark's reprint)


   MANCH--COO--MAIM

     Rhees, Smithsonian Institution (p. 58)


   MANHAW--GAW (Wounding Arrow)

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (pp. 141--146, vol. I)
     Gue, History of Iowa (p. 66, vol. I)


   MAUSHEMONE (The Big Flying Cloud)

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (pp. 157--160, vol. I)


   MEW--HU--SHE--KAW (White Cloud)

     Catlin, Fourteen Ioway Indians. Also given in
     Catlin, Notes of Eight Years' Travels in Europe,
     etc, as Mu--hu--shee--kaw.


   MISSORAHTARRAHAW (The Female Deer that bounds over
   the Plains, i. e., prairie)

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (pp. 141--146, vol. I)


   MOA--NA--HON--GA (Great Walker)

     Also known as Winaugusconey (the man who is
     not afraid to travel) and Big Neck


   McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (pp. 157--160, vol. I)


   MOSTEOSE (Holy Rabbit, an old Iowa Chief still living)


   MUN--NE--O--YE A woman

     Catlin, Notes of Eight Years' Travels in Europe


   NAR--GE--GA--RASH (British)

     Treaty of 1854

     Treaty of 1861


   NAW--A--TAWMY

     Laws and Treaties (p. 396, vol. I)


   NE--O--MON--NE (Walking Rain)

     Rhees, Smithsonian Institution, (p. 57)

     (Probably the same Indian referred to by McKenny
     & Hall under Ne--O--Mon--Ni, _q. v._)


   NE--O--MON--NI (The cloud out of which the rain comes)

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (pp. 81--82, vol. 2)


   NEU--MON--GA (Walking Rain)

     Schoolcraft, Indian Tribes (vol. III)


   NEU--MON--YA (Walking Rain)


     Catlin, Fourteen Ioway Indians. Given in this author's
     Eight Years' Travels in Europe and his
     Descriptive Catalogue as No--o--mun--nee (He who
     walks in the rain)


   NIH--YU--MAH--NI (La Pluie qui marche)

     Maximilian, Travels (p. 272, vol. I)


   NO--HO--MUN--YA

     (One who gives no attention, also known as Roman Nose)


   Catlin, Fourteen Ioway Indians


   NOTCH--EE--NING--A (No Heart--also called White
   Cloud)

     Catlin, Notes of Eight Years' Travel in
     Europe, (vol. I) Treaty of 1861


   NOT--CHI--MI--NE

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (vol. II, p. 59)


   NAN--CHEE--NING--A

     Treaty of 1854


   NATCE--NINE

     Hamilton, B. A. E., (vol. II, p. 424)


   NAUCHE--WING--GA

     Rhees, Smithsonian Institution


   NA--CHE--NING--A

     Schoolcraft Indian Tribes (vol. III)


   NAUCHENINGA

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (vol. I, p. 151)


   NOTOYAUKEE (One Rib)

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (pp. 89--93, vol. II)


     OKE--WE--ME (Female bear that walks on the back
     of another)

   Catlin, Fourteen Ioway Indians


   PAH--TA--COO--CHEE (The Shooting Cedar)

     Catlin, Notes of Eight Years' Travel in
     Europe, (vol. I)


   PEKENIGA (The Little Star)

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (pp. 157--160, vol. I)


   RAINBOW (The)

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (pp. 89--93, vol. II)


   RANT--CHE--WAI--ME (Female Flying Pigeon)

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (vol. I, pp. 147--149)


   RUTON--WE--ME (Pigeon on the wing)

     Catlin, Fourteen Ioway Indians


   RUTON--YE--WE--MA (Strutting Pigeon)

     Catlin, Fourteen Ioway Indians


   SHAU--HAU--NAPO--TINIA (The man who killed three Sioux)

     Also known as Moanahonga (Great Walker)
     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (pp. 161--162,
     vol. I)


   SE--NON--TY--YAH (Blister Feet)

     Catlin, Fourteen Ioway Indians


   SHON--TA--YI--GA (Little Wolf)


     Catlin, Fourteen Ioway Indians. (Spelled Shon--ta--ye--ee--ga
     in Catlin's Notes of Eight Years' Travels in Europe, etc.)


   SHOON--TY--ING--A

     Treaty of 1854


   TAH--RA--KEE

     Treaty of 1861


   TAH--RO--HA (Many Stages)

     Maximilian, Travels. Clark reprint (vol. III)


   TAH--RO--HON

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (pp. 85--87, vol. II)


   TAH--RO--HON (Plenty of Meat)

     Rhees, Smithsonian Institution, (p. 56)


   TA--PA--TA--ME (Sophia--Wisdom)

     Catlin, Fourteen Ioway Indians


   THUR--O--MONY

     Treaty of 1861


   TOHEE, CHARLES

     Laws and Treaties (p. 396, vol. I)


   TOHEE, DAVID

     Bull. 30, B. A. E.


   TOHEE, EMMA

     Laws and Treaties (p. 396, vol. I)


   TOHEE, MAGGIE

     Laws and Treaties (p. 396, vol. I)


   TOHEE, MARY

     Laws and Treaties (p. 396, vol. I)


   TOHEE, WILLIAM

     Treaty of 1861


   TOTANAHUCA (The Pelican)

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (pp. 59--61, vol. II)


   WA--CHA--MON--YA (He who kills as he walks)

     Wisconsin Hist. Soc. Coll. vol. XVIII, p. 363.
     (There also termed El Ladron)


   WA--CHA--MON--YA (One who kills as he walks)

   Fulton, Red Men of Iowa

     Given in McKenny & Hall's Indian Tribes as
     Wat--che--mon--ne (the Orator) and in Rhees,
     Smithsonian Institution--Stanley--as Wa--cha--mow--ne
     (Partisan)


   WAHUMPPE

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (p. 85, vol. II)


   WANATHURGO

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (pp. 59--61, vol. II)


   WASH--KA--MON--YA (Fast Dancer)

     Catlin, Fourteen Ioway Indians


   WASSAN--NIE (The Medicine Club)

     Maximilian, Travels (vol. III, Clark issue)


   WA--TAN--YE (One always foremost)

     Catlin, Fourteen Ioway Indians


   WA--TA--WE--BU--KA--NA (Commanding General)

     Catlin, Fourteen Ioway Indians

     In Catlin's Notes of Eight Years' Travel in Europe
     this is spelled Wa--tah--we--buck--a--nah


   WAW--MO--MOKA (Thief)

     Schoolcraft Indian Tribes (vol. III)


   WAH--MOON--AKA (The man who steals)

     Treaty of 1854


   WAW--NON--QUE--SKOON--A

     Schoolcraft Indian Tribes (vol. III)


   WENUGANA (The man who gives his opinion)

     McKenny & Hall Indian Tribes (pp. 89--93, vol. II)


   WHITE CLOUD, Jefferson

     Laws and Treaties (p. 396, vol. I)


   WHITE HORSE

     Treaty of 1861


   WI--E--WA--HA (White Cloud--also known as Good Disposition)

     Schoolcraft, Indian Tribes (vol. III)


   WINANGUSCONEY (see Moa--Na--Hon--Ga)


   WO--HUM--PA

     Rhees, Smithsonian Institution (p. 49)

     Probably the same Indian as referred to by McKenny
     & Hall as Wahumppe, _q. v._


   WOS--COM--MUN (The Busy Man)

     Catlin, Notes of Eight Years' Travels in Europe


   WY--EE--YOGH (The man of Sense)

     Catlin, Notes of Eight Years' Travels in Europe


   YU--MAH--NI (la pluie qui marche)

     Maximilian, Travels


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Attacapa, a name by which the Choctaws and other southern Indians
designated the different tribes occupying southwestern Louisiana and
southern and southeastern Texas. Less than a dozen are known to be in
existence today.

[2] Oroyelles, probably of the Caddoan family and now extinct.

[3] An important tribe of the Algonquian family closely allied with the
other Plains Indians, particularly with the Cheyennes.

[4] A tribe of the Iroquoian family frequenting during the 17th century
the territory extending south from Lake Erie to the Ohio river, and now
practically extinct unless their descendants may be called a part of the
Seneca living at present in the Indian Territory.

[5] A vocabulary included among others is from the Duralde manuscripts
in the Library of the American Philosophical Society.

[6] For further synonomy see appendix C.

[7] Clark. INDIAN SIGN LANGUAGE. Philadelphia, 1885.

[8] Mallery. INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF SIGN LANGUAGE AMONG THE NORTH
AMERICAN INDIANS, ETC. B. A. E., _Introductions_, No. 3.

[9] See J. O. Dorsey in _The American Antiquarian, 1879_, and the same
writer in _Bul. Philos. Soc., 1880_. The term literally translated means
"belonging to this place" or "the home people." See also W J McGee in
the _15th Rep._, B. A. E., 1897.

[10] Dorsey.

[11] Considerable controversy has taken place as to the actual meaning
of this word. Various suggestions have been made, more generally by
local writers, and in the confusion it is difficult to come to a final
decision. The latest authorities prefer Gray Snow, and the task would be
considerable to enumerate all those who have written on the subject. W.
W. Hildreth in _Annals of Iowa_, April, 1864, gives the derivation from
the Omaha word Py--ho--ja, or "Grey Snow." It has been claimed that the
word is of Dakota origin and that it was written by the French Aiouez
(see Charlevoix, 1723) and that its anglicization was gradual. The
present meaning of _Iowa_ in the Dakota is "something to write or paint
with." Schoolcraft is authority for the statement that the tribes called
themselves Pa--ho--ches, meaning "Dusty Nose," or "Dirty Face," and Foster
in the text emphasizes this point. One writer boldly asserts that the
word Iowa is a corruption from Kiowa, and Antoine Le Claire, the
celebrated half--breed interpreter, stated that the word in his tongue
signified "this is the place." Taylor Pierce, long connected with the
trading post of Fort Des Moines, testified in favor of _Kiowa_, giving
it the same definition as last named. Fulton (RED MEN OF IOWA) mentions
certain writers who interpreted the word as "beautiful." W. E. Richey
(MEMOIRS OF THE EXPLORATION OF THE BASIN OF THE MISSISSIPPI VALLEY,
Volume VII, 1903) says, "I feel inclined to think that the word _Iowa_
came from Harahey...." For a full discussion of this subject see _Annals
of Iowa_, April, 1864, and July, 1896.

[12] See Mooney, THE CHEYENNE INDIANS, _Mem. of the Amer. Anthro.
Assoc._ No. 1, 1907. His map as given there is especially useful.

[13] See Williamson, MINN. HIST. SOC. COLL., Vol. I, (reprint 1902),
page 242. According to this authority the Iowa were known as Ayuhba,
which form is also used by Riggs, DAKOTA GRAMMAR AND DICTIONARY, 1852.
In MEMOIRS OF EXPLORATIONS IN THE BASIN OF THE MISSISSIPPI, Vol. III,
1900, is included an excellent historical chart by N. H. Winchell
showing geographical names and other data prior to Nicollet's Map of
1841. This shows the location of the Iowa tribe in that section between
the present southern boundary of Iowa and lower Minnesota on the east,
and along the southern bank of the Missouri river to the westward.
Catlin's Map of 1833 places this tribe in the southwestern portion of
the State of Iowa.

[14] See note 60.

[15] For an extended account of the Recollet Father Zenobe Membre, see
Le Clercq's FIRST ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FAITH IN NEW FRANCE, Shea's
translation, II, 133; 1881.

[16] See Richman (I. B.). AMONG THE QUAKERS, AND OTHER SKETCHES, 3rd ed.
Contains _Mascoutin, A Reminiscence of the Nation of Fire_.

[17] Original in St. Mary's College Archives, Montreal and reproduced in
THE JESUIT RELATIONS, published by The Burrows Brothers Co. See also
Joliet's Map of 1674 (_ibid._ vol. LIX.) where relative positions are
practically the same.

[18] Michel Accault, a companion of La Salle.

[19] See Prof. N. H. Winchell's admirable map contained in Volume III,
MEMOIRS OF EXPLORATIONS IN THE BASIN OF THE MISSISSIPPI, St. Paul, 1900.
This chart shows with great precision the geographical names and their
dates, given prior to Nicollet's map of 1841, and locates the Iowa on
the west bank of the Mississippi, near the "Riviere de Aiounoues"
according to Franquelin's map of 1684, and also in a space bounded on
the north and east by the St. Peter's river (Minisoute Ouadeba or St.
Peters river of Jefferys, 1762) and on the south and west by the Riviere
aux Liards and Redwood river respectively, of Long. Franquelin's map,
_Carte de la Louisiane_, a facsimile of which is in the Library of
Harvard University, (the original formerly in the Archives of the
Marine, in Paris, has been lost), locates the Ai8u8e and the Paote on
the Riviere des Ai8u8e (Iowa).

[20] In Thwaites' edition of Lewis & Clark (ORIGINAL JOURNALS, VI,
91--92, 1905) the number is given as "200 warriors or 400 souls, eighteen
leagues up Platte river on the S. E. side, although they formerly lived
on the Missouri above the Platte." When the traders first knew the Iowa
the band consisted of about 800 souls. Their principal points of
commerce were Robidoux's Post at Black Hills, the present site of St.
Joseph, Missouri, and at Council Bluffs, though not as extensively at
the latter. See Chittenden, THE AMERICAN FUR TRADE, p. 874, and also THE
HENRY AND THOMPSON JOURNALS, Coues ed., for an account of Robidoux's
dealings. Maximilian's TRAVELS, Vol. 1, p. 257 _note_, has a valuable
reference.

[21] Probably what was then known as the Big Platte in Nebraska.

[22] See F. J. Goodfellow, S. D. HIST. COLL., Vol. 2, also the original
translation of a portion of Le Sueur's _Voyage_ in WIS. HIST. COLL.,
Vol. XVI. The Fort took its name from L'Huillier, one of the French
farmer generals and Le Sueur's patron. In September, 1700, Le Sueur
reached the present site of Mankato, Minn., and built the Fort, which
according to most authorities was completed Oct. 14 of that year. The
post was abandoned in 1703.

[23] REP. OF SEC. OF WAR, 1829.

[24] PIKE'S EXPEDITION, ETC., ETC., edited by Elliott Coues, 1895.

[25] JESUIT RELATIONS, Vol. LX, also note 60.

[26] Buffalo hides. The earlier explorers referred to the buffalo (Bison
americanus) under various cognomens. _Boeuf sauvage_, was the name given
to it by Du Pratz; the Canadian voyageurs termed it simply _le boeuf_.
See Allen, HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN BISON, 1877.

[27] Red Pipestone, a fine grained argillaceous sediment, the analysis
of which is as follows: Silica, 48:20, alumina, 28:20, ferric oxide, 5,
carbonate of lime, 2:60, manganous oxide, 0:60, magnesia, 6, water 8:40,
loss 1. First brought to the attention of mineralogists by George Catlin
and named in his honor "catlinite."

[28] The important feature of camping was left to the women, according
to the Indian custom. Occasion often controlled circumstances as to the
form of this particular ceremony. Hunting, visiting, or war parties were
usually carefully organized. The tribal circle, each segment composed of
a clan, gens or band, made a living picture of tribal organization and
responsibilities. The usual opening through the circle was toward the
east, which calls to mind religious rites and obligations of an earlier
people, being further exemplified in the position which was usually
given to the ceremonial tents. See A. C. Fletcher in _Pub. of the
Peabody Museum_.

[29] The clan or gens among the American Indians is an intertribal,
exogamic group of persons actually or theoretically consanguine. See J.
N. B. Hewitt in BUL. 30, B. A. E., and J. W. Powell in the 17TH REP., B.
A. E., Part I, 1898, page 29 _passim_. Throughout all of the American
tribes of savagery it has been found that peculiar groups of persons are
organized and known as shamanistic societies or phratries, viz: banded
religious bodies. The term however must be extended that it may include
the ceremonies which the savage believed to be religious. Peace and
warfare, health and disease, welfare and want, pleasure and pain, all,
whether good or evil, are believed to be under control of such societies
as noted. The gens is to be found in Greek and Roman history, where it
is known as the agnatic kindred. The tribe remains a body of
consanguineal kindred: it is composed of groups of gentes that are
incest groups, and the mates in marriage must belong to different
gentes. See appendix A.

[30] For an account of the mythical origin of each of the Iowa gens, see
J. O. Dorsey, SOCIAL ORGANIZATION OF THE SIOUAN TRIBE in the _Journal of
American Folklore_, Vol. IV, 1891, No. XV, page 338. This was recorded
by Rev. William Hamilton in 1848 and was published from a letter by him
to the children of the Presbyterian Sunday schools. Dorsey also obtained
from the Iowa, during a visit to that tribe in 1880, a list of the
gentes and later perfected this with a list of the subgentes. This list
is included herewith as an appendix from the 15TH REP., B. A. E., 1897.

[31] Dorsey. SIOUAN SOCIOLOGY.

[32] See Cyrus Thomas. MOUND EXPLORATIONS, 12TH REP., B. A. E., 1894,
page 111. A plan of the section noted above is given in this report,
which is the most complete on mound exploration ever attempted. It may
well be termed definitive.

[33] The study of games as played among North American Indians, is a
field in itself. This has been covered most exhaustively by Mr. Stewart
Culin in his recent work, GAMES OF THE NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS: (24th
Rep., B. A. E., 1907), and to this volume we refer any student who
wishes to make detailed researches. In addition to this work, Catlin's
great contribution to the history of the North American tribes is in
itself a mine of general information, though his little volume entitled
THE FOURTEEN IOWAY INDIANS, published in London in 1844, treats of the
games of the Iowa more particularly. Where possible the earlier edition
of that writer's LETTERS AND NOTES should be used rather than the later
issues with the colored plates, such method of illustration having been
condemned by Catlin from the beginning. INDIAN GAMES AN HISTORICAL
RESEARCH by Andrew McFarland Davis, is a valuable monograph. All of the
above refer _in extenso_ to the Iowa.

[34] THE FOURTEEN IOWAY INDIANS. London, 1844. This little pamphlet is
now scarce, and was written by Catlin at the instance of the parties who
brought the Indians to London. He was particularly interested from an
humanitarian point of view. An edition was issued in Paris, a year
later, with woodcuts by Porret, adding interest to the work.

[35] THE FOURTEEN IOWAY INDIANS.

[36] _Ibid._

[37] A translation of the song for this occasion is as follows:

   "Take care of yourself--shoot well, or you lose,
   You warned me, but, see! I have defeated you!
   I am one of the Great Spirit's children!
   Wa--konda I am! I am Wa--konda!"

See Alice C. Fletcher's paper, _Tribal Structure_, as included in THE
PUTNAM ANNIVERSARY VOLUME, Cedar Rapids, 1909, for a further exposition
of the word Wa--K_on_'--da.

[38] Culin. GAMES OF THE NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS.

[39] In a game witnessed by the writer, on the Sauk and Fox Reservation
at Tama, Iowa, in 1907, the ball used was wood. This tribe is slow to
acquire new ideas, nor has it advanced greatly during the last fifty
years. The game was one of intense excitement and is still played along
the same lines as in the earlier days of this once powerful band.

[40] FIELD COLUMBIAN MUSEUM CATALOG, No. 71404.

[41] THE FOURTEEN IOWAY INDIANS.

[42] The oldest attempt at a detailed description of the game is given
by Nicolas Perrot, MEMOIRE SUR LES MOEURS, COSTUMES ET RELIGION DES
SAUVAGES DE L'AMERIQUE SEPTENTRIONALE. First printed in Paris in 1864.

[43] See Catlin. THE FOURTEEN IOWAY INDIANS, page 19, for a translation
in full of this song.

[44] THE FOURTEEN IOWAY INDIANS, page 20.

[45] _Ibid._, page 21. In the French translation of this pamphlet these
_chansons_ are particularly well rendered.

[46] A contrary statement is made by Messrs. Irvin and Hamilton in
Schoolcraft's HISTORY OF THE INDIAN TRIBES, Vol. III, page 260, (1853),
wherein the Iowa are mentioned as being "but a remnant of a once
numerous and considerable nation." Estimates as follows given as a
total--in 1764 (Bouquet) 1100; 1804 (Lewis & Clark) 800; 1822 (Morse)
1000; 1829 (Sec. of War) 1000; 1832 (Drake) 1100; 1843 (Report Indian
Affairs) 470; and the Donaldson Report (11th Census, taken from Jackson
catalog of photographs, etc., Washington, 1877) 1894, states that their
number reached 1500 early in the 19th century. Catlin conjectures 1400
in 1832 and 992 in 1836. The total remnant of the tribe in 1905 was 314;
in 1908, 339, these figures being from official sources.

[47] Writing in 1876, the author seems unfamiliar with Pere Andre's
reference to the tribe in 1676, and quotes from Le Sueur who knew this
band first in 1700.

[48] The present spelling of the name was first used by Lieut. Albert M.
Lea in his NOTES ON THE WISCONSIN TERRITORY, 1836, wherein he referred
to the country west of the Mississippi as the "Ioway District",
suggested by the Ioway river. This point will be brought out fully in
the new edition of Lea's Notes now in preparation by the Ioway Club,
edited by L. A. Brewer.

[49] The tribe has long since been divided and now occupies lands in the
Potawatomi and Great Nemaha Agency in Kansas and the Sauk and Fox Agency
in Oklahoma. See Kappler. LAWS AND TREATIES, 2 vols., Washington, 1903.

[50] Benard de la Harpe, a French officer who came to Louisiana in 1718.
His Narrative of Le Sueur's Expedition is included by French in his
HIST. COLL. OF LOUISIANA, Part III, page 19 _et seq._, and is also given
by Shea, EARLY VOYAGES UP AND DOWN THE MISSISSIPPI, Albany, 1861,
reprint, 1908. For a lengthy bibliographical note of this work, see A.
McF. Davis in Winsor's NARRATIVE AND CRITICAL HISTORY, Vol. V, page 63.

[51] Pierre Charles le Sueur, a French geologist, member of Iberville's
Expedition of 1698, and sent primarily to report on the "green earth"
(copper mines), known to him through previous researches in 1695.

[52] At the best information concerning the expedition of Le Sueur is
scant. The most important source is the work of one Penicaut, Perricaut
or Perricault (see A. McF. Davis in Winsor's NARRATIVE AND CRITICAL
HISTORY, Vol. V, page 71), a carpenter who accompanied the Iberville
party from France in 1698 and remained in Louisiana until 1781. The most
complete form in which we are able to read the JOURNAL is in Margry's
DECOUVERTES ET ETABLISSEMENTS DES FRANCAIS DANS L'OUEST ET DANS LE SUD
DE L'AMERIQUE SEPTENTRIONALE, Vol. V, page 319 _et seq._ Penicaut's
ANNALS OF LOUISIANA (1698--1722) are translated in their entirety in
French's HIST. COLL. OF LOUISIANA, _New Series_, Vol. I, but this
translation must be read with caution as French was not the most careful
of translators.

[53] In a communication from Mr. W. H. Holmes, former Chief of the
Bureau of American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution, with reference to
the Penicaut manuscript, he states that no translation from this source
has been made and that French (HIST. COLL.) is unreliable. For the
printed form, in the French language, Margry's DECOUVERTES (ETC.), Vol.
V, is the authority.

[54] Pierre Francois Xavier de Charlevoix, a French traveller, born
October 29, 1682, at St. Quentin, died, 1761. His most important work of
American interest bears the following title: HISTOIRE ET DESCRIPTION
GENERALE DE LA NOUVELLE FRANCE, AVEC LE JOURNAL HISTORIQUE D'UN VOYAGE
FAIT PAR ORDRE DU ROI DANS L'AMERIQUE SEPTENTRIONALE. Paris, 1744.
Several editions of the work, in three and six volumes respectively,
were issued in Paris during this year. JOURNAL D'UN VOYAGE (ETC.),
usually forms the last volume, with a separate title page. During 1761
this portion was published in English in London, two volumes, but it was
not until 1865--72 that the HISTOIRE proper was translated, and at that
time by J. G. Shea (New York, 6 vols.). Foster is obviously in error as
to the date mentioned (1722). Charlevoix's work was not ready for
publication at that time, though he had no doubt finished it in 1724, at
which date he issued simultaneously, the JOURNAL which was addressed to
the Duchess de Lesdiguieres. Some partial reprints of Charlevoix do not
contain the linguistic portions.

[55] Here the writer no doubt refers to the mutilated and meretricious
issue of the Lewis and Clark JOURNALS, published by William Fisher of
Baltimore during 1812. As a contribution to the literature of the
subject, the volume is entirely devoid of worth and statements
concerning linguistics or events have little value. Coues, in his
edition of the Lewis and Clark TRAVELS, gives full details of this
publication. See also the present writer's BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE LEWIS AND
CLARK EXPEDITION, _Literary Collector_, March, 1902. In Thwaites'
edition of the ORIGINAL JOURNALS OF LEWIS AND CLARK, 1904, (Vol. I, page
45), Ayauway is noted, as an early form of spelling.

[56] It is difficult to determine exactly the work here referred to.
Without doubt in this instance, as in those which follow, Foster had
access to Rev. S. R. Riggs's GRAMMAR AND DICTIONARY OF THE DAKOTA
LANGUAGE, published by the Smithsonian Institution as one of the
Contributions to Knowledge, in 1852. Dr. Riggs was a close student of
Siouan linguistics and published much material on the subject, his
DAKOTA--ENGLISH DICTIONARY being exhaustively edited with great care by
J. O. Dorsey and published in final form in 1892 by the Bureau of
American Ethnology. A comprehensive list of the published and manuscript
material by Riggs, who was ably assisted by his wife, will be found in
Pillings's SIOUAN BIBLIOGRAPHY, page 60 _et seq._, and in the S. D.
HIST. COLL., Vol. II. At various intervals through the original work,
Foster acknowledges his indebtedness to the first volume of the MINN.
HIST. SOC. COLL. In this there is an excellent article by Riggs entitled
THE DAKOTA LANGUAGE, from which considerable assistance was no doubt
obtained.

[57] According to J. O. Dorsey in BULL. 30, B. A. E., their tribal
tradition is, that after separating from the parent stock they "received
the name of Pahoja, or Gray Snow." See also W J McGee, 15th Rept., B. A.
E., 1897, who says: "Iowa or Pa--qo--tce signifies 'Dusty Heads'." See
also ON THE ORIGIN OF THE OTOS, JOWAYS AND MISSOURIS, etc., in
Maximilian's TRAVELS (Vol. III, Clark's reprint, page 313). This
purports to be a tradition communicated to Maj. Jonathan L. Bean, of
Pennsylvania, Gov. Sub. Agent to the Sioux, 1827--34. The Iowa are
designated as Pa--ho--dje, or Dust Noses.

[58] Rev. William Hamilton and Rev. Samuel McCleary Irvin, Presbyterian
missionaries to the Iowa and Sauk and Fox Indians located near the mouth
of the Great Nemaha river. They established what was known as the Ioway
and Sac Mission Press at their station in 1848, issuing therefrom
several volumes now of great rarity including AN IOWAY GRAMMAR and THE
IOWAY PRIMER, the latter in two editions. (See illustration). For a
complete list of their writings see Pilling, BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE SIOUAN
LANGUAGES, p. 31 _et seq._ There is an autobiography of Hamilton in
Nebraska State Historical Society REPORTS, Vol. I, 1885, first series.

[59] See the map by Waw--Non--Que--Skoon--a.

[60] See note 47. Several references are made to the Iowa tribe at an
[Sidenote: +Andre, 1676+] earlier date than here mentioned. Father Louis
Andre, who came to Canada during 1669, and was at Green Bay, Wis., from
1671 to 1681, designates the Nadoessi Mascouteins, which name was
applied to the Iowa because of their relations for a time with the
Sioux, as living about 200 leagues from that place, in 1676. (See
article by Father A. E. Jones, in _U. S. Cath. Hist. Mag._, No. 9,
1889). Father Andre died in Quebec in 1715. [Sidenote: +Membre, 1680+]
Even before the date of Le Sueur we have a reference by Father Zenobius
Membre in 1680, placing the Oto and Iowa in three great villages built
near a river "which empties in the river Colbert [Mississippi] on the
west side above the Illinois, almost opposite the mouth of the
Wisconsin." More than this he appears to locate a part of the Ainove
[Sidenote: +Perrot, 1685+] (no doubt Aioue) to the west of the Milwaukee
river in Wisconsin. Perrot (MEMOIRS), apparently locates them, in 1685,
on the plains in the vicinity of the Pawnee. Marquette's map of 1674--79
gives the Pahoutet (Iowa), Otontanta (Oto), Maha (Omaha) a position on
the Missouri river, but this is done by mere chance and without
authority. La Salle, writing Hennepin August 22, 1682, mentions both Oto
and Iowa under Otontanto and Aiounonea.

[61] It has often been a matter for conjecture why Le Sueur should have
given himself so much concern over a mine of "green earth" as the
discovery does not seem to be one meriting a great amount of
distinction. Not long since, however, certain mineral specimens of
metallic substance, apparently a sort of iron or copper ore, were found
in the banks of the Le Sueur river (so--called by J. N. Nicollet, and on
a map published in 1773, the river St. Remi), near the confluence with
the Blue Earth river. Penicaut in his relation speaks of the deposit
extending many miles on the banks of the river (MINN. HIST. SOC. COLL.,
Vol. III, page 8), and it is therefore not improbable that the intrepid
explorer had in mind something more real than colored marls of blue,
green or yellow, which owed their color to the silicate of iron, and
which were, when free from sand, highly prized and used for paint by the
Indians. As an article of trade they were of value, but even this point
does not fully explain the expedition. (See MS. in _Ministere des
Colonies_, Paris, Vol. XV, c. 11, fol. 39). In a letter from the
Intendant Champigny to the French Minister, also in this collection in
Paris, the former says, "I think that the only mines that he (Le Sueur)
seeks in those regions are mines of beaver skins." For a lengthy sketch
of the material first referred to, see MINN. HIST. SOC. COLL., Vol. I,
1902, reprint, also in Neill, HISTORY OF MINNESOTA, 3d edition, 1878,
page 165, note.

[62] See note 50.

[63] In Shea's VOYAGES UP AND DOWN THE MISSISSIPPI, Albany, 1861 (1902).

[64] The manuscript here referred to was found in 1869 in Paris, among a
collection of similar material, and purchased by the Library of
Congress. It consists of 452 pages, antique writing, and was first
published in Margry's DECOUVERTES, (ETC.), in French. Portions of it
have been printed by the MINN. HIST. SOC. COLL., Vol. III, Part I, and
the whole work included by B. F. French, in translation, in his HIST.
COLL. OF LOUISIANA.

[65] Edward Duffield Neill, born Philadelphia, August 9, 1823, died St.
Paul, September 26, 1893. Presbyterian minister in St. Paul, 1849--60;
private secretary to President Johnson, 1865--69; consul to Dublin,
1869--70 and later president of Macalester College, St. Paul. Published
extensively in American history and his HISTORY OF MINNESOTA (last
edition, 1887), is considered of highest authority. See Dr. Alexander
Nicolas De Menil's LITERATURE OF THE LOUISIANA TERRITORY (St. Louis,
1904), for a sketch of this writer and of many others whose names are
prominent in the history of the middle west.

[66] Le Sueur was commandant at Chequamegon for a considerable time,
beginning in 1693. During that year he erected two forts, one near the
present site of Red Wing, Minnesota, and one on Madeline Island,
believing this necessary in order to keep open the Bois Brule and St.
Croix trading route. See WIS. HIST. COLL., Vol. XVI, page 173. For a
sketch of Chagaouamegong (now corruptly written Chequamegon), see the
excellent little volume by Rev. Chrysostom Verwyst, O. S. F., entitled
MISSIONARY LABORS OF FATHERS MARQUETTE, MENARD, AND ALLOUEZ IN THE LAKE
SUPERIOR REGION, 1886, pp. 181--182, also WIS. HIST. COLL., Vol. I, which
gives the Indian nomenclature, showing the early form, Chegoiwegon.

[67] A mistake taken bodily from Neill's HISTORY OF MINNESOTA, first
edition, which was corrected in a later edition to "Fort Perrot on the
west side of the Mississippi, on a prairie, just below the expansion of
the stream known as Lake Pepin."

[68] Nicolas Perrot, one of the most prominent of the early voyageurs
and very well acquainted with the northwestern tribes, gained their
confidence and good--will from the beginning. He was born in 1644 and
employed by the Jesuits from 1660--65, later connecting himself with the
Ottawa fur--trade. He is probably better known, however, as an explorer,
and in 1685 was employed by the government of Canada as commandant in
the northwest. During his last years he composed his MEMOIRS which
remained in manuscript until 1864, at which time they were published
with copious notes by Tailhan. Perrot died August 13, 1717. See
Stickney, PARKMAN CLUB PAPERS, Milwaukee, 1896.

[69] Pierre de Fevre de La Barre, successor of Frontenac, as governor of
Canada, and in turn followed by Denonville. An ignorant and by no means
worthy occupant of the position.

[70] A small, square--ended barge equipped with both oars and sail.

[71] Nineteen men. La Harpe's NARRATIVE. Penicaud.

[72] _Ibid_. Gives the date as 29th.

[73] Gabriel Marest, S. J., who came to Canada in 1694 and died at the
Kaskaskia Mission, September 15, 1714. Practically his whole life was
spent among the Kaskaskia Indians of Illinois, once the leading tribe of
the Illinois Confederacy, and he taught among them continually.

[74] "This does not accord with the general tradition that the Dakota
were always enemies of the Sioux, nevertheless the name Nadoessi
Mascouteins seems to have been applied to the Iowa by the earlier
missionaries because of their relations for a time with the Sioux."
Cyrus Thomas, BULL. 30, B. A. E., 1907.

[75] This statement is wholly without foundation. Iberville was the
third son of a burgher of Dieppe one Charles Le Moyne, father of
fourteen children, who migrated from his native country to Canada in
1640, at which place he joined the Jesuits. Sieur d' Bienville together
with his brother were leaders in that conflict with the English in the
Hudson Bay region (see Winsor, NARRATIVE AND CRITICAL HISTORY, Vol. IV),
and it is not exaggeration to term Pierre le Moyne, Sieur d'Iberville,
as one of the most noted Canadian naval officers of his time. His death
occurred from yellow fever, July 9, 1706, at Havana. _Cf._ THE FIRST
GREAT CANADIAN. By Charles B. Reed, Chic., 1910; also WIS. HIST. COLL.,
Vol. XVI. Certain writers affirm the relations between Sauvole and the
others here mentioned, notably Gayarre, in his HISTORY OF LOUISIANA,
Vol. I, page 58. Later authorities, however, as Hamilton, COLONIAL
MOBILE, page 32, take opposite views. See note 51 for a sketch of Le
Sueur.

[76] Gen. Lewis Cass, on his return from France in 1842, brought certain
French manuscripts among which was a census of Indian tribes, compiled
by one M. Chauvignerie. Schoolcraft gives this in full in his monumental
work on the Indians of North America. (Vol. III, pages 553--557).

[77] There is no authority for this statement. See note 50. Le Sueur
came to Canada as a young man and became a fur trader. During 1693 and
for a few years thereafter he was commandant at Chequamegon and
discovering lead mines on the upper Mississippi he made efforts to
secure permission to work them, but without success. Little is known of
his last years and his death occurred while on the ocean, probably
before 1710.

[78] It is doubtful that Le Sueur gave assistance as here stated. The
map in question is CARTE DU CANADA OU DE LA NOUVELLE FRANCE ET DES
DECOUVERTES QUE Y ONT ETE FAITES. Par Guillaume Del'Isle. Paris,
l'auteur 1703. (19--1/2 x 25--1/2). There is a reproduction, reduced, in
Neill's MINNESOTA, 3d edition, and Milburn's THE LANCE, CROSS AND CANOE,
p. 72, on which is to be found the following note:

"The manuscript from which the above Map was prepared, was found in the
'Bibliotheque du roi,' in Paris in a volume of La Harpe's journeys of
1718--1722. It is said to bear date the year 1700. If so, it is evident
that after the original preparation and before publication some one has
added matter subsequently ascertained, for the Map above contains items
of as late a date as 1717. Also is to be noted the fact that while all
the other parts of the Map are in the French language, one single
English phrase is to be found in the lower right--hand corner, to--wit:
'De Soto landed 31 May, 1538.' This would indicate that some one other
than the original draftsman had taken part in its creation and at a time
subsequent to its original preparation."

Claude and Guillaume Delisle--father and son--were the most noted French
cartographers of their day. There have been reissues of the map in
question, corrected to date. For a sketch of Delisle see C. A.
Walckenaer, VIES DE PLUSIEURS PERSONNAGES CELEBRES, 1830; and Vincent
Dutouret, EXAMEN SUR TOUTES LES CARTES GENERALES DES QUATRE PARTIES DE
LE TERRE, MISES AU JOUR, PAR FEU DELISLE, DUPUIS 1700, JUS'QU EN 1725,
POUR SERVIR D'ECLAIRCISSEMENT SUR LA GEOGRAPHIS, 1728.

[79] Plate 30.

[80] Vol. III, page 262.

[81] For an extended account of the Radisson--Groseillers controversy see
MEMOIRS OF EXPLORATIONS IN THE BASIN OF THE MISSISSIPPI, Vol. VI,
MINNESOTA, by J. V. Brower, and particularly RADISSON AND GROSEILLIERS,
by Henry Colin Campbell, issued as No. 2 of the _Parkman Club
Publications_, Milwaukee, 1896.

Pierre Esprit Radisson was a native of St. Malo in Brittany and in 1651
settled with his parents at Three Rivers on the St. Lawrence. Medard
Chouart, Sieur des Groseilliers, was born in Brie, France, though the
exact dates in both cases are not known. It is supposed that these two
adventurers died in Great Britain at an advanced age as they had served
in the interest of the French and British as policy dictated. In the
Minnesota monograph above referred to, Mr. Benjamin Sulte, one of the
leading Canadian authorities on the early French explorations, gives in
detail a vast amount of highly important material concerning the
Radisson--(Chouart) Groseillers connection and a more popular though
somewhat biased exposition of the same subject is given by Miss Agnes C.
Laut in her PATHFINDERS OF THE WEST, part I.

Radisson's highly important account of his wanderings are in manuscript
in The Bodleian Library, and include the record of his first four
voyages, including two journeys westward in company with Groseilliers,
and his subsequent Hudson Bay experiences are in the British Museum. In
1885 _The Prince Society_ of Boston published the work in its entirety
and to the lasting benefit of American history.

For further reference to this matter see WIS. HIST. COLL., Vol. XI, and
also the same Society's PROCEEDINGS, for 1895.

[82] Daniel Greysolon du Luth (Lhut) was for a time commandant of the
northwest. Coming to Canada as an officer from France about 1676 he
conducted an expedition against the Sioux in 1678 and a year later took
formal possession of their country for France. He spent several years as
an explorer and fur trader, and in 1689 returned to the St. Lawrence.
His death occurred in 1710. See MINN. HIST. COLL., Vol. I. His name is
spelled Du Luth, Du Lut, Dulhut, De Luth, Dulud and Du Luhd in the old
documents. The city of Duluth, St. Louis Co., Minnesota, founded in
1856, was named after the explorer at the suggestion of Rev. J. G.
Wilson of Logansport, Indiana. See Stennett, HISTORY OF THE ORIGIN OF
THE PLACE NAMES CONNECTED WITH THE C. & N. W. R. R., ETC., Chic., 1908.

[83] Foster's interjection.

[84] Foster's interjection.

[85] See note 49.

[86] See the treaty of 1824 (Appendix B) for migration. Maximilian says
that "the Ioway [Iowa] dwelt on the Grand river till 1827, when they
removed to the Little Platte river." Clark's reprint of the TRAVELS,
Vol. I, p. 245. Later on in the same volume, he writes of this tribe:
"On the northern bank, seven miles up that [the Little Platte] river,
are the villages of the Ioway Indians...." No doubt the tribe had
journeyed in this direction after the troubles of the Black Hawk War in
1832.

[87] See Hornaday, THE EXTERMINATION OF THE AMERICAN BISON, 1887, and
Allen, THE AMERICAN BISONS, LIVING AND EXTINCT, 1876.

[88] In 1876. Marquette found them in 1673 at the mouth of the Des
Moines river. This, as will be seen, was their first location.

[89] Report of Albert J. Vaughan, sub--agent of the Great Nemaha agency,
published in the REP. OF THE COMM. OF IND. AFFAIRS, 1849, p. 143,
Washington, 1850. Vaughan says, "According to the census of last spring
payment of annuities, the Iowas numbered 802, and the Sacs and Foxes
128". (_Communicated in a letter from Mr. F. W. Hodge, Chief of the
Bureau of American Ethnology_).

[90] This should be 1702.--ED.

[91] The MEMORIAL here referred to is in manuscript and among the
archives of the government, at Paris. It is one of the most valuable
documents on the subject of early nations and country of the
Mississippi, and portions of it have been transcribed and translated for
the MINN. HIST. SOC. COLL., Vol. I, p. 279, 1850--56 (reprint 1902). The
full title of the work is as follows: MEMORIALL OF M. D'IBERVILLE UPON
THE COUNTRY OF THE MISSISSIPPI, THE MOBILE AND ITS ENVIRONS, THEIR
RIVERS, INHABITANTS AND THE COMMERCE WHICH COULD BE CARRIED ON IN LESS
THAN FIVE OR SIX YEARS IN SETTLING IT. The quotation by Foster, given
above, has been proof read to correspond with the translation here
mentioned, and includes only the line preceding the brackets.

[92] This enumeration as included in Schoolcraft's INDIAN TRIBES, has
been variously assigned to different authorities. O'Callaghan supposes
it to be by Joncaire, but Thwaites proves otherwise, as Joncaire was on
the Ohio at the time and not at Mackinac. Schoolcraft relies on the note
which he says was on the original manuscript, that the compilation was
by Chauvignerie--i.e., Michel Maray, sieur de Chauvignerie, an
interpreter employed at the post--and Thwaites comes to the final
conclusion that it was done by Celeron, the Younger, commandant at
Mackinac at this date, and particularly well acquainted with the Indian
tribes. See WIS. HIST. SOC. COLL., Vol. XVII.

[93] 1806--should be 1810.

[94] In Thwaites, ORIGINAL JOURNALS OF LEWIS AND CLARK, Vol. VI, p. 91,
a reference is made to the "Ne persa" (i. e., Nez Perces;) and this is
given as a trader's nickname.

[94] A portion of this treaty is included in Maximilian's TRAVELS, Vol.
III, pg. 315 _et seq._--Clark's reprint.




INDEX

(Names of Iowa Indians not included in Index. See proper appendix)


   Accault, Michel. La Salle's companion. xxii, _note_

   ACCOUNT OF AN EXPEDITION FROM PITTSBURG TO THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS,
     _Maj._ S. H. Long, leader. xxxiv

   ACCOUNT OF AN EXPEDITION TO THE SOURCES OF THE MISSISSIPPI AND
     THROUGH THE WESTERN PART OF LOUISIANA, ETC., AN. By Pike. xvi,
     xxiv, xxv, _note_. xxxiv, 42

   Algonquian family, Eries, an important tribe of the. x, _note_
     Referred to, 34

   Alleghany Mountains, 33, 40

   Allen, Dr. J. A. THE AMERICAN BISONS, LIVING AND EXTINCT, 1876.
     39, _note_
       HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN BISON, 1877. xxv, _note_

   _American Antiquarian_, Dorsey's article in. xvii, _note_

   AMERICAN BISONS, LIVING AND EXTINCT, THE. By Allen. 39, _note_

   AMERICAN FUR TRADE OF THE FAR WEST, THE. By Chittenden. xxiii, _note_

   AMERICAN STATE PAPERS, _Indian Affairs_. Ed. by Lowrie and Clarke. 49

   AMONG THE QUAKERS. By Richman. xxi, _note_

   Andre, Father Louis. xxi, xxv. 1, _note_. 10, _note_. 11, _note_

   _Annals of Iowa_, W. W. Hildreth writes in, concerning name
     of the Iowa. xviii, _note_. xix, _note_

   ANNALS OF LOUISIANA, by Penicaut. 4, _note_

   approaching dance, The. xxxiii

   Arapaho Indians, x

   Arkansas River, 35

   arrow, Game of. xxx

   Attacapa Indians, x

   Ayuhba, A name given the Iowa. xx, _note_


   Bald Island. See Prairie Island

   ball--play dance, The. xxxiii

   ball--playing, or racket, xxx

   Baltimore, Maryland, 5, _note_

   "Baptiste," i.e., Winnebago ex--chief, also known as "The Half Breed,"
     7, 8

   Bean, _Maj._ Jonathan L. 6, _note_

   bear dance, The. xxxiii

   beaver skins, in connection with Le Seuer's mines, 12, _note_

   BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE LEWIS AND CLARK EXPEDITION, by Miner. 5, _note_

   Bibliotheque du Roi, The. In Paris. 22, _note_

   Bienville, Sueur d'. 19, 20, _note_

   Big Platte River, xxiv, _note_

   Big Sioux River, 23, 24

   Bison americanus, French names for. xxv, _note_

   Black Dog. See Grey Iron

   Black Hawk War, 39, _note_

   Black River, 17

   Black Tomahawk, a Sioux Indian, 29, 30

   Blue Earth Country, 7;
       post at, 21;
       region, 3, 35;
       river, xx, 9, 11, _note_. 12, 14, 17, 18, 32

   Bodleian Library, The. 27, _note_

   Bois Brule trading route, 13, _note_

   Bouquet, Henry. 1, _note_. 40

   Brewer, L. A. Ed. of Lea's NOTES ON THE WISCONSIN TERRITORY. 2, _note_

   Brie, France, 27, _note_

   British Museum, The. 28, _note_

   Brower, Jacob V. 27, _note_

   _Bulletin of the Philosophical Society_, Dorsey's article in. xvii,
     _note_

   Bureau of American Ethnology, The. xii, xiii, 4, _note_. 5, _note_
     41, _note_


   Caddoan family, Oroyelles probably of the. x, _note_

   calumet dance, The. xxxiii

   Campbell, Henry Colin. His Account of Radisson and Grosseillers.
     27, _note_

   camp circle, Division among the Iowa. xxv.

   Cannon River, 34

   CARTE DE LA LOUISIANE, by Franquelin. xxiii, _note_. _ibid._, _note_

   CARTE DU CANADA OU DE LA NOUVELLE FRANCE ET DES DECOUVERTES QUE Y ONT
     ETE FAITES, by Delisle. 22, _note_

   Carver, Capt. Jonathan. 32

   Catlin, George. His map of 1833. xx, _note_
       "Catlinite," named after. xxv, _note_. xxviii, _ibid._,
         _note_. xxix, xxxi, xxxii, _note_
       His Works, xxxiv, 1, _note_

   catlinite, xxv, _ibid._, _note_

   Cass, Gen. Lewis, his ms. census of Indian tribes. 21, _ibid._, _note_
     40, 53

   Celeron, Jean Baptiste, _Sieur de Blainville_. 41, _note_

   Census of Indian tribes, First attempt toward a. 21,
       Chauvignerie's referred to, _ibid._, _note_

   CESSIONS OF LAND BY THE INDIANS TO THE UNITED STATES, by Royce. 49

   Chaienne. See Cheyenne Indians.

   Champigny, Jean Bochart de. _Intendant._ 12, _note_

   Chariton River, 38

   Charlevoix, Pierre Francois Xavier de. xviii, _note_. 4,
       his HISTOIRE ET DESCRIPTION GENERALE DE LA NOUVELLE FRANCE, _ibid._,
         _note_;
       his JOURNAL D'UN VOYAGE, _ibid._

   Chauvignerie, Michel Maray, _sieur de_. 21, _note_
       His report, 41, _ibid._, _note_

   Chequamegon, Wisconsin, 13, _note_. 22, _note_

   Cheyenne Indians, Allied to the Arapahoes, and other Plains Indians.
     x, _note_. xx, _ibid._, _note_
      (Shien--Sha--i--ena--Chainne--Shiene) 31, 34, 35

   CHEYENNE INDIANS, THE. By Mooney. xx, _note_

   Chippewa Indians, (Chippeway), 9, 53, 54

   Chippeway River, 28

   Chittenden, Capt. Hiram Martin. His AMERICAN FUR TRADE. xxiii, _note_

   Chiwere group. Formed by the Oto, Missouri and Iowa tribes. xvii

   Choctaw Indians, x, _note_

   Chouteau, Auguste. 49

   Clarke, Matthew St. C. _ed._ with Walter Lowrie of THE AMERICAN STATE
     PAPERS. 49

   Clark, William. 49, 50, 53, 56, 59, 61, 66

   Clark, W. P. THE INDIAN SIGN LANGUAGE. xvi, _note_

   Colbert River. See Mississippi River

   COLONIAL MOBILE, by Hamilton. Cited, 20, _note_

   Columbus, Christopher. 31

   Commissioner of Indian Affairs, REPORT OF. 1, _note_

   Congressional Library, The. 4, 12, _ibid._, _note_

   CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE ETHNOGRAPHY AND PHILOLOGY OF THE INDIAN TRIBES
     OF THE MISSOURI VALLEY, by Hayden. xxxiv, xxxv

   Coteau des Prairies, 38

   Coues, Dr. Elliott. His edition of Lewis and Clark's TRAVELS. xxiii,
       his edition of THE HENRY AND THOMPSON JOURNALS, xxiii, _note_
       Of PIKE'S TRAVELS, xxv, _note_
       Lewis and Clark 5, _note_

   Council Bluffs, Iowa, xxiii, _note_

   Crow Indians, 35

   Culin, Stewart. GAMES OF THE NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS, xxviii, _note_
     xxxi, _note_

   "Cut Throats," or a "Cut Throat," Name given the Iowa by Mallery. xvi


   "DAKOTA--LEXICON," i.e., DAKOTA--ENGLISH DICTIONARY,
      by Rev. S. R. Riggs. 5, _ibid._, _note_;
        ed. by Dorsey, _ibid._, 8, 10

   Dakota or Siouan stock, Iowa included in one of the southwestern
       branches of. xvii, xviii, _note_. xxi, xxv;
       Proved in the management of children. xxvii;
       referred to; 5, 8, 9,
       Indians, 14, 16, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35

   Davis, Andrew McFarland. INDIAN GAMES. xxviii, _note_. 3, _note_

   DECOUVERTES ET ETABLISSEMENTS DES FRANCAIS DANS L'OUEST ET DANS
     LE SUD DE L'AMERIQUE SEPTENTRIONALE, by Margry. 3, _note_. 4,
     _note_. 12, _note_

   Delisle, Claude and Guillaume, their map of northwestern Louisiana,
     i.e., CARTE DU CANADA OU DE LA NOUVELLE FRANCE ET DES DECOUVERTES
     QUE Y ONT ETE FAITES. 22, _ibid._, _note_. 23, _note_

   De Menil, Dr. A. N., his LITERATURE OF THE LOUISIANA TERRITORY. 13,
    _note_

   Denonville, Jacques Rene de Brisay, _Marquis de_. 14, _note_

   Derroin, Jeffrey. Iowa interpreter, 65

   Des Moines River, xxii, xxiii, 9, 14, 24, 37, 38, 40

   De Soto, Ferdinand. 23, _note_

   De Tailly--an interpreter, 42

   d'Evaque, M. Left by Le Sueur in charge of Fort l'Huillier. 19, 21

   Dieppe, France, 20, _note_

   "Dirty Face," or "Dusty Nose." i.e., Pa--ho--ches, xviii, _note_

   DISCOVERY AND EXPLORATION OF THE MISSISSIPPI VALLEY, by Shea. xv

   Donaldson, Thomas. 1, _note_

   Dorsey, J. O. His articles in _American Antiquarian_, 1879, and
    _Bulletin of the Philosophical Society_, 1880. xvii, _note_. xviii,
    _note_
       In _Journal of American Folklore_, 1891, xxvi, _note_, xxvii,
        _note_
       In Bull. 30, B. A. E. 6, _note_, 45

   Dougherty, John. 64

   Drake, Samuel J. 1, _note_

   "Drowsy Ones," an Iowa cognomen, 8

   Dublin, Ireland, 12, _note_

   Du Luth, Daniel Greysolon. 28,
       various spellings, of the name, _ibid._, _note_

   Duluth, Minnesota. 28, _note_

   DURALDE MANUSCRIPTS, THE. In the Library of the American Philosophical
     Society. xi, _note_. 12, _note_

   "_Dusty--Heads_," 6, _ibid._, _note_. 8, 10

   "Dusty Nose" or "Dirty Face," i.e., Pa--ho--ches, From Schoolcraft.
      xviii, _note_. 6, _ibid._, _note_. 7

   Dutouret, Vincent. HIS EXAMEN SUR TOUTES LES CARTES GENERALES DES
     QUATRE PARTIES DE LE TERRE, MISES AU JOUR, PAR FEU DELISLE,
     DUPUIS 1700, JUSQU'A EN 1725, POUR SERVIR D'ECLAIRCISSEMENT SUR
     LA GEOGRAPHIS, 1728. 23, _note_


   eagle dance, The. xxxiii

   EARLY VOYAGES UP AND DOWN THE MISSISSIPPI, by Shea. 3, _note_. 12,
     _note_

   Edwards, Ninian. 49

   Erie Indians, x

   EXAMEN SUR TOUTES LES CARTES GENERALES DES QUATRE PARTIES DE LA TERRE,
     MISES AU JOUR, PAR FEU DELISLE, DUPUIS 1700, JUSQU'A EN 1725, POUR
     SERVIR D'ECLAIRCISSEMENT SUR LA GEOGRAPHIS, 1728, by Dutouret.
     23, _note_

   EXTERMINATION OF THE AMERICAN BISON, THE. By Hornaday, 39. _note_


   _Falls Dwellers, The._ 9

   Falls of St. Anthony, xix, 31, 39

   Field Columbian Museum, CATALOG, xxxi, _note_

   FIRST GREAT CANADIAN, THE. By Reed. 20, _note_

   Fish Creek, 24, 37

   Fisher, William. Publisher of the 1812 issue of Lewis and Clark's
     TRAVELS. 5, _note_

   Fletcher, Alice C. Writing in PUBLICATIONS OF THE PEABODY MUSEUM.
     xxvi, _note_
       Her paper _Tribal Structure_, in THE PUTNAM ANNIVERSARY VOLUME,
         xxix, _note_

   Fletcher, J. E. His paper on the Winnebago in Schoolcraft's INDIAN
     TRIBES, vol. iii, 37

   Ford, Worthington C. xiii

   Forts:
       Des Moines, xix, _note_
       Leavenworth, 38, 39, 59
       l'Huillier, xxiv, 18, 19
       Perrot, 13, _ibid._, _note_, 14, 19
       Snelling, 29

   Foster, Dr. Thomas. ix, x, xi, xviii, _note_. 4, _note_. 5, _note_
     6, _note_. 34, _note_. 41, _note_

   "Four Lakes," The. 36

   FOURTEEN IOWAY INDIANS, THE. An important pamphlet by George Catlin.
     xxviii, _note_. xxxi, _note_. xxxii, _note_. xxxiii, _note_
       French translation of, _ibid._

   Fox Indians, xxiv, xxvii, 7, 17, 21, 41, _note_. 53, 54, 55, 56, 59,
     60, 61, 62, 64, 66, 67, 68, 69, 73, 74, 75, 76

   France, 3 _note_

   Franquelin, Jean Baptiste Louis. His map of 1684. xxiii, _note_
       CARTE DE LA LOUISIANE, the facsimile, _ibid._

   French, B. F. HISTORICAL COLLECTIONS OF LOUISIANA. 3, _note_. 4,
     _note_. 12, _note_

   Fulton, A. R. THE RED MEN OF IOWA. xiii, xix, _note_


   Gallatin, Albert. 34

   Gayarre, C. E. A. HISTORY OF LOUISIANA. 20, _note_

   Goodfellow, F. J. his article in SOUTH DAKOTA HISTORICAL COLLECTIONS.
     xxiv, _note_

   GRAMMAR AND DICTIONARY OF THE DAKOTA LANGUAGE, by Riggs. 5, _note_

   Grand Nemaha River, i.e., Great Nemaha River. 58, 61, 67, 74, 76

   Grand River, 38, 39, _note_

   Gray Snow, An Iowa cognomen. xviii, _note_. 6, _note_

   Great Lakes, 53

   Great Nemaha Agency, (or sub agency), 40, 64, 73,
       River. xxiv, 2, 7, 39

   Great Nemaha River. See Grand Nemaha River

   Great Platte River. See Nebraska River

   Green Bay, Wisconsin. xxi, 10

   "green earth," Iberville's copper mines. 3, _note_

   Grey Iron or Black Dog, a Sioux Indian. 30, 34

   Groseilliers, Medard Chouart, _sieur des_. 27, _ibid._, _note_. 28,
    _note_


   Hamilton, Peter. His COLONIAL MOBILE cited. 20, _note_

   Hamilton, Rev. William. xxvii, _note_. 1, _note_. 7, _ibid._, _note_
     25, 36, 45

   Harahey, W. E. Richey refers to this in connection with _Iowa_. xix,
    _note_

   Havana, Cuba. Iberville dies in. 20, _note_

   Hayden, F. V. CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE ETHNOGRAPHY AND PHILOLOGY OF THE
     INDIAN TRIBES OF THE MISSOURI VALLEY. xxxiv, xxxv

   Hennepin, Father Louis. 28, 32, 35

   Hennepin LETTER, La Salle's. xxii. 11, _note_

   HENRY AND THOMPSON JOURNALS, THE. Coues ed. xxiii, _note_

   Hewitt, J. N. B. Writes on consanguinity in BULL. 30 B. A. E. xxvi,
    _note_

   Hildreth, W. W. On the name "Gray Snow." xviii, _note_

   HISTORICAL COLLECTIONS OF LOUISIANA, by French. 3, _note_. 4, _note_
     12, _note_

   HISTOIRE ET DESCRIPTION GENERALE DE LA NOUVELLE FRANCE, by Charlevoix.
     4, _note_

   HISTORY OF LOUISIANA, THE. By Gayarre. 20, _note_

   HISTORY OF LOUISIANA, by La Harpe. 12

   HISTORY OF MINNESOTA, THE. By Neill. 12, _note_. 13, _note_. 21, 22,
    _note_. 23

   HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN BISON, by Allen, xxv, _note_

   HISTORY OF THE EXPEDITION UNDER THE COMMAND OF LEWIS AND CLARK,
    _ed._ by Elliott Coues. xxiii, 5, _note_

   HISTORY OF THE ORIGIN OF THE PLACE NAMES CONNECTED WITH THE C.
     & N. W. R. R., by Stennett. 28, _note_

   Hodge, Frederick Webb. xiii, 41, _note_

   Holmes, William H., xiii, 4, _note_

   Hornaday, William T. THE EXTERMINATION OF THE AMERICAN BISON. 39,
    _note_

   Hudson Bay region, English in the. 20, _note_
       Groseillers in the. 28, _note_. 36


   Iberville, Pierre le Moyne, _sieur d'_. His Expedition of 1698. 3,
    _note_. 19,
       Governor of Louisiana, 20,
       his MEMORIAL, _ibid._, _ibid._, _note_. 41

   Illinois Confederacy, 15, _note_

   Illinois River, xxi, 11, _note_. 15, 20, 53

   Illinois, State of. 15, _note_. 36, 38

   Indiana, State of. 28, _note_

   Indian Bureau, at Washington. ix., 40,
     REPORT OF, 1874, 42

   INDIAN GAMES, by Davis. xxviii, _note_. 3, _note_

   INDIAN LAND CESSIONS IN THE UNITED STATES, by Royce. 49

   _Indian Record, The._ ix, x, xi

   INDIAN SIGN LANGUAGE, THE. By Clark. xvi, _note_

   Indian Territory, Seneca Indians in. xi, _note_

   INFORMATION RESPECTING THE HISTORY, CONDITION AND PROSPECTS
     OF THE INDIAN TRIBES OF THE UNITED STATES, by Schoolcraft.
     xii, xviii, _note_. xxiii, 1, _note_. 7, 21, _ibid._, _note_
     24, 25, 36, 37, 41, _note_

   Ing--Kee--Ko--Kee, or game of moccasin, xxix

   Iowa Indians, x, xi, xii, xvi, xvii, xviii, _note_. xix, xx,
    _note_. xxi, xxii, xxiii, _note_. xxiv, xxv, xxvii, _ibid._,
    _note_. xxviii, _ibid._, _note_. xxix, xxx, xxxi, xxxiv, 1,
    _note_. 2, 3, 6, _note_. 7, _ibid._, _note_. 8, 9, 10, _ibid._,
    _note_. 11, _note_. 13, 14, 15, 16, _ibid._, _note_. 17, 22, 24,
     26, 28, 29, 30,
       their village, _ibid._, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 37, 39,
       present reservation, _ibid._
       in 1827, _ibid._, _note_. 41, _note_. 42, 45, 49, 50, 51, 52,
         53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68,
         69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76

   Iowa reserve, 74

   Iowa River, i. e., "Riviere de Aiounones," xxiii, _note_
     Riviere des Ai8u8e (Iowa), as noted on Franquelin's map,
    _ibid._, 30,
       Iowa Indians locate on, 38

   Iowa Synonomy. See page xv and Appendix C, page 77

   Iowa, State of. xx, _note_. 2, _note_. 9, 23,
       rivers in lower and upper, 39

   Iowaville, Village in Wapello county, Iowa. Indian mounds at,
     xxvii

   Ioway and Sac Mission Press, 7, _note_

   "Ioway District," 2, _note_

   Ioway Club, The. 2, _note_

   IOWAY GRAMMAR, AN. By Hamilton and Irvin. 7, _note_

   Ioway Missionaries, i. e., Messrs. Hamilton and Irvin, 7.

   IOWAY PRIMER, AN. Hamilton and Irvin. 7, _note_

   Iroquoian family, includes the Eries. x, _note_

   Irvin, Rev. Samuel McCleary. 1, _note_. 7, _ibid._, _note_. 25, 36

   Isle Pelee, 14, 19


   Jackson, William H. 1, _note_

   James River, 24

   Jefferys, Thomas. THE NATURAL AND CIVIL HISTORY OF THE FRENCH
     DOMINIONS IN NORTH AND SOUTH AMERICA, 1760 edition, xxii

   JESUIT RELATIONS, THE. Thwaites edition. xxi, _note_. xxv, _note_
     xxxv

   Johnson, Pres. Andrew. 12, _note_

   Joliet, Louis. His map of 1674. xxii

   Joncaire, Louis Thomas de. 41, _note_

   Jones, Father A. E. His article in _U. S. Catholic Hist. Mag._ 11,
    _note_

   JOURNAL D'UN VOYAGE, by Charlevoix. 4, _note_

   JOURNAL, (i.e., RELATION) of Penicaut. 3, _note_

   JOURNAL, of Marquette. referred to, xxi


   Kansas, Northeastern. Iowa reservation in. xxxiv

   Kansas River, 51

   Kansas, State of. 2, _ibid._, _note_

   Kappler, Charles J. _ed._ INDIAN AFFAIRS. _Laws and Treaties._
     2 vols., 1903. 2, _note_. 49

   Kaskaskia Indians, 15, _note_

   Kaskaskia Mission, Illinois, 15, _note_

   Kickapoo northern boundary line, The. 61, 67

   Kiowa Indians, xvi, xviii, _note_. xix, _note_

   kon--tho--gra, or game of platter. xxix


   La Barre, Pierre Le Fevre de, 14, _ibid._, _note_

   Lac--qui--Parle, 35

   La Harpe, Benard de. 3, _ibid._, _note_. 12, 15, _ibid._, _note_. 22,
    _note_. 32

   Lakes:
       Koshkonong, 36
       of the Woods, (Rainy Lake), 36
       Pepin, 13, _ibid._, _note_. 34
       Superior, 36

   Lakes. See Great Lakes

   LANCE, CROSS AND CANOE, THE, by Milburn. 22, _note_

   La Salle, Robert Cavelier, _sieur de_. xxii, 11, _note_

   Laut, Miss Agnes C. Her PATHFINDERS OF THE WEST. 27, _note_

   LAWS AND TREATIES, 2 vols., _ed._ by Kappler. 2, _note_. 49

   Lea, Lieut. Albert Miller. NOTES ON THE WISCONSIN TERRITORY. 2,
    _note_

   Le Claire, Antoine. Half--breed Interpreter, on the word Iowa. xviii,
    _note_

   Le Clercq, Father Christian. FIRST ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FAITH IN NEW
     FRANCE. xxi, _note_

   Le Moyne, Charles. Father of Iberville. 20, _note_

   Le Page du Pratz, his name for the buffalo, xxv, _note_

   Lesdiguieres, Duchess de. 4, _note_

   Le Sueur, Pierre C. xx, xxii, xxiv, _ibid._, _note_. 1, _note_. 3,
    _ibid._, _note_
       His NARRATIVE, _ibid._, 10, 11, _note_. 12, _ibid._, _note_. 13,
        _ibid._, _note_. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, _ibid._, _note_. 21,
         22, _ibid._, _note_. 32

   Le Sueur River, 11, _note_

   LETTERS AND NOTES OF EIGHT YEARS' TRAVELS, ETC. By George Catlin.
     xxviii, _note_

   Lewis and Clark, TRAVELS. Coues ed., xxiii,
       Thwaites edition of the ORIGINAL JOURNALS, _ibid._
       TRAVELS, xxxiv, 1, _note_
       Fisher's edition of 1812; 4, _ibid._, _note_
       ed. by Coues. 5, _note_
       BIBLIOGRAPHY OF, by Miner, _ibid._
       Thwaites ed. _ibid._, 42

   l'Huillier, French Farmer--General. xxiv, _note_

   _Literary Collector, The._ 5, _note_

   LITERATURE OF THE LOUISIANA TERRITORY, by De Menil. 13

   Little Nemaha River, 58

   Little Platte River, 38, 39, _note_

   Little Sioux River, 23

   Logansport, Indiana, 28, _note_

   London, England, 4, _note_

   Long, Maj. Stephen Harriman. His ACCOUNT OF AN EXPEDITION FROM
     PITTSBURG TO THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS. xxxiv

   Louisiana, Southwestern. Attacapa Indians in. x, _note_

   Louisiana, State of. 3, _note_

   Lowrie, Walter. _ed._ with Matthew St. C. Clarke, of THE AMERICAN
     STATE PAPERS. 49


   Macalester College, St. Paul, Minnesota. 12, _note_

   Mackinac, 41, _note_

   Madeline Island, Minnesota, 13, _note_

   Madison, Wisconsin, 36

   Mallery, Garrick. His SIGN LANGUAGE AMONG THE NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS.
     xvi, _note_

   Mandan Indians, 33, 35

   Mankato, Minnesota, Reached by Le Sueur in 1700. xxiv, _note_

   Manypenny, George W. 66

   Marest, Gabriel. 15, sketch, _ibid._, _note_. 16

   Margry, Pierre. DECOUVERTES ET ETABLISSEMENTS DES FRANCAIS DANS
     L'OUEST ET DANS LE SUD DE L'AMERIQUE SEPTENTRIONALE. 3, _note_
     4, _note_. 12, _note_

   Marquette, Jacques. xv,
       his manuscript map, xxi, 11, _note_
       His JOURNAL, xxi

   marriage customs, Iowa varies but little from other kindred tribes.
     xxvii

   Mars, Thunder compared to. 30

   Massachusetts Historical Society, xiii

   Maximilian, Alexander Philipp, _Prinz von Wied--Neuwied_. TRAVELS.
     xvi, xxiii _note_. xxxiv, 6, _note_. 39, _note_. 56, _note_

   McCoy, Isaac. 68

   McGee, W. J., His article in B. A. E. 1897. xvii, _note_. 6, _note_

   Membre, Father Zenobius. xxi, _ibid._, _note_. 11, _note_

   MEMORIAL, THE. By Iberville. 20, 41, _ibid._, _note_

   MEMOIRE LES MOEURS, COUTUME ET RELIGION DES SAUVAGES DE L'AMERIQUE
     SEPTENTRIONALE, by Perrot. 14, _note_

   MEMOIRS OF EXPLORATIONS OF THE BASIN OF THE MISSISSIPPI VALLEY, VOL.
     VII. W. E. Richey writes in concerning the word Iowa. xix, _note_
     xx, _note_. xxiii, _note_. VOL. VI, account of the
     Radisson--Groseillers controversy, 27, _note_

   _Memoirs of the American Anthropological Association_, Mooney's
        article on the Cheyenne therein. xx, _note_

   Menaige, an ex--Interpreter, 8

   Mendota, Minnesota, 30, 34

   Menominee Indians, 53

   Michigan, Lake. Winnebago Indians on shores of. xviii

   Michigan Territory, 54

   Milburn, William Henry, author of THE LANCE, CROSS AND CANOE, 1892.
     22, _note_

   Mille Lac, Minnesota, 27, 29

   Milwaukee River, xxi, 11, _note_

   Miner, W. H. BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE LEWIS AND CLARK EXPEDITION, 5, _note_

   Minetare (i.e., Hidatsa) Indians, 35

   Ministere des Colonies, Bureau of, at Paris. 11, _note_

   Minnesota Historical Society Collections, 1850--56. xii, xx, 6, _note_
     12, _note_. 28, _ibid._, _note_. 31, 41, _note_, 1864. xv, 11,
    _note_. 12, _note_

   Minnesota Historical Society, 21

   Minnesota River, xix, 12, 28, 29, 30, 31, 33, 35

   Minnesota, State of. xx, _note_. 3, 7, 9, 13, _ibid._, _note_. 27, 28,
    _ibid._, _note_. 30, 31, 32

   Minnesota Valley, 32, 34, 35

   MISSIONARY LABORS OF FATHERS MARQUETTE, MENARD AND ALLOUEZ, ETC.
     By Verwyst. 13, _note_

   Mission of the Immaculate Conception of the Holy Virgin in Illinois,
     15

   Mississippi River, Winnebago Indians reach the. xviii, xix, xxi
    (Colbert), xxii, 1, 2, _note_. (Colbert) 11, _note_. 13, _ibid._,
    _note_. 14, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37,
     38, 51, 53, 54, 56, 64

   Mississippi Valley, Iberville's MEMORIAL ON. 20.
       Indian tribes in, 21,
       country of the, 41, _note_

   Missouri Indians, xvii. 42, 56, 57, 59

   Missouri River, xx, _ibid._, _note_. xxii, xxiii, _ibid._, _note_
     xxiv, 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 11, _note_. 19, 20, 23, 24, 25, 30, 33, 35,
     37, 38, 39, 51, 53, 54, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 64, 66, 67, 68

   Missouri, State of. Iowa Indian lands in, xxxiv,
       Indian tribes in, 37,
       Iowa Indians on Chariton River in, 38, 51, 59, 60, 68, 73

   Missouri Valley, Indian tribes in, 21

   Mobile, Alabama, 19, 21

   Montcalm, Gozon de St. Veran, Louis Joseph, _Gen. Marquis de_. 42

   Mooney, James, xiii, xvi,
       his THE CHEYENNE INDIANS, xx, _note_

   Morgan, Col. Willoughby. 56

   Morse, Rev. Jedidiah D. 1, _note_

   murder, Punishment of. xxvii


   NARRATIVE AND CRITICAL HISTORY OF AMERICA, by Winsor. 3, _note_
     20, _note_

   Natchez Indians, 21

   NATURAL AND CIVIL HISTORY OF THE FRENCH DOMINIONS IN NORTH AND
     SOUTH AMERICA, THE. By Jefferys. xxii

   NEBRASKA HISTORICAL SOCIETY COLLECTIONS, 1885. xvi. 7, _note_

   Nebraska River, (Great Platte). 38

   Nebraska, State of. xxiv, 2, 24

   Nebraska Territory, 73

   "Necklace People," name given the Iowa by the Kiowa. xvii

   Neill, Rev. E. D. 12, sketch, _ibid._, _note_
       Reference to his HISTORY, xii, 13, _note_. 14, 21, 22, _note_. 23

   Nemaha River, 67, known as Walnut Creek, 74

   Nez Perce, colloquial name for the Iowa, 42, _ibid._, _note_

   Nicollett, J. N. His map of 1841. xx, _note_. xxiii, _note_. 11,
    _note_

   Nohearts Creek, 74

   Noland's Creek, 67

   NOTES ON THE WISCONSIN TERRITORY, by Lea. 2, _note_


   Oak Grove, Minnesota, Indian mounds at. 29, 33,
       an Iowa village, 30, 34

   O'Callaghan, Edmund Bailey. 41, _note_

   Ohio River, 33, 41, _note_

   Ojibwa Indians, (Saulteurs), 9, 36

   Oklahoma, State of. Oto Indians of. xxxi,
       Iowa Indians in, xxxiv, 2, _note_

   Omaha Indians, Once part of the Winnebago Nation. xvii, xviii,
    _note_. xx, xxii, xxiii, xxv, xxvii, xxx, 11, _note_. 19, 20, 23,
     32, 35, 56, 57, 58, 59

   ORIGINAL JOURNALS OF THE LEWIS AND CLARK EXPEDITION, _ed._ by
     Thwaites. xxiii, _note_. 5, _note_. 42, _note_

   Oroyelles, (Indians). x

   Osage Indians, 16, 35

   Oto Indians, xvii, xxi, xxii, xxiii, xxx, xxxi, 11, _note_. 17, 24,
     32, 35, 42, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59

   Ottawa fur trade, 14, _note_

   Ottawa Indians, 53


   Pa--ho--ches. i. e., "Dusty Nose," or "Dirty Face," xviii, _note_
     6, _ibid._, _note_. 7, 8, 10, 16, 23, 24

   Pahoja or Gray Snow name given the Iowa. xviii

   Pahoutet, Marquette's name for the Iowa. xxi

   Paris, France, 41, _note_

   PARKMAN CLUB PAPERS, article by Stickney in. 14, _note_
       H. C. Campbell's article in. 27, _note_

   PATHFINDERS OF THE WEST, by Laut. 27, _note_

   Pawnee Indians, 11, _note_

   Peabody Museum, PUBLICATIONS. Article by Fletcher in. xxvi, _note_

   Penicaut, [Penicaud, Pennecaud, Perricaut, Perricault] 3, _ibid._,
    _note_;
       his JOURNAL, _ibid._;
       his ANNALS OF LOUISIANA, _ibid._ 4, _note_. 11, _note_. 12, 15,
         _note_. 21

   Perrot, Nicolas. His description of Indian ball--playing. xxxi, _note_;
       locates the Iowa. 11, _note_. 14,
       sketch, 14, _note_

   Pierce, Taylor, xix, _note_

   Pike, Zebulon Montgomery. TRAVELS. xvi,
       statement concerning the Iowa. xxiv, xxv, _note_
       TRAVELS. xxxiv,
       report referred to, 42

   Pilcher, Joshua. 63

   Pilling, J. C. SIOUAN BIBLIOGRAPHY. 5, _note_. 7, _note_

   Pilot Knob, Minnesota, 30

   Platte River, xxiii, _note_. xxiv, 35

   Point Le Sable, Green Bay, Wisconsin, 13

   Ponca Indians, Once part of the Winnebago Nation, xvii, xxx

   Pond, Rev. G. H. 28, 29

   Porret, M. Artist, Illustrates THE FOURTEEN IOWAY INDIANS,
     xxviii, _note_

   Portage des Sioux, Missouri, Treaty of 1815 held at. 49

   Potawatomi and Great Nemaha Agency, 2, _note_

   Potawatomi Indians, 17, 53

   Powell, John Wesley. Writes on consanguinity in 17th REP.
     B. A. E. Part I. xxvi, _note_

   Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin, 54, 56, 59, 60

   Prairie or Bald Island, 14

   Prairieville, Minnesota, 34

   Presbyterian Church, Missionaries of, among the Iowa. 70

   Prince Society, The. 28, _note_

   PUTNAM ANNIVERSARY VOLUME, THE. xxix, _note_

   Py--ho--ja. i.e., "Grey Snow," xviii, _note_


   Quebec, 11, _note_

   Quinn, Peter, 30


   racket, or ball--playing, Game of. xxx

   Radisson, Pierre Esprit. 27, _ibid._, _note_

   Rainy Lake. See Lake of the Woods

   RED MEN OF IOWA, THE. By Fulton. xiii

   Red Pipe Stone Quarry, Minnesota, 38

   Redwood River, as designated by Long. xxii, _note_

   Red River of the North, 35

   Red Wing, Minnesota, 13, _note_

   REED, DR. CHARLES B. Author of THE FIRST GREAT CANADIAN. 20, _note_

   REPORT OF THE COMMISSIONER OF INDIAN AFFAIRS, 1849. 41, _note_

   REPORT OF THE INDIAN BUREAU, 1874. 42

   Richey, W. E. xix, _note_

   Richman, I. B. AMONG THE QUAKERS. xxi, _note_

   Riggs, Mrs. S. R. 5, _note_

   Riggs, Rev. S. R. DAKOTA GRAMMAR AND DICTIONARY. xv, xx, _note_. 5,
    _note_
       His article on Dakota language, 6, _note_

   Riviere aux Liards, xxiii, _note_

   Rivers:
       Arkansas, 35
       Big Platte, xxiv, _note_
       Big Sioux, 23, 24
       Black, 17
       Blue Earth, xx, 9, 11, _note_. 12, 14, 17, 18, 32
       Cannon, 34
       Chariton, 38
       Chippeway, 28
       Colbert (see Mississippi)
       Des Moines, xxii, xxiii, 9, 14, 24, 37, 38, 40
       Grand, 38, 39, _note_
       Grand Nemaha, 58, 61, 67, 74, 76
       Great Nemaha, 58, 61, 67, 74, 76
       Great Platte, 38
       Illinois, xxi, 11, _note_. 15, 20, 53
       Iowa, xxiii, _note_. 30, 38
       James, 24
       Kansas, 51
       Le Sueur, 11, _note_
       Little Nemaha, 58
       Little Platte, 38, 39, _note_
       Little Sioux, 23
       Milwaukee, xxi, 11, _note_
       Mississippi, xviii, xix, xxii, 1, 2, _note_. 11, _note_. 13,
         _ibid._, _note_. 14, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 32, 33,
         34, 36, 37, 38, 51, 53, 54, 56, 64
       Missouri, xx, _ibid._, _note_. xxii, xxiii, _ibid._, _note_.
         xxiv., 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 11, _note_. 19, 20, 23, 24, 25, 30, 33,
         35, 37, 38, 39, 51, 53, 54, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 64, 66,
         67, 68
       Nebraska, 38
       Nemaha, 67, 74
       Nohearts, [creek] 74
       Nolands, [creek] 67
       Ohio, 33, 41, _note_
       Platte, xxiii, _note_. xxiv, 35
       Red, of the North, 35
       Redwood, xxii, _note_
       Rock, xix, 28, 36, 37
       St. Croix, 14
       St. Laurence, 27, _note_. 28, _note_
       St. Peter's, xxiii, _note_
       St. Remi, 11, _note_
       Salt, 38
       Walnut, [creek] 74
       Wisconsin, xxi, 11, _note_. 16, 17, 23, 28
       Wolf, xxiv, 39, 68

   Robidoux's Post, xxiii, _note_

   Rock River, xix, 28, 36, 37

   Rocky Mountains, 33

   Royal Marine Office, at Paris. 40

   Royce, C. C. His CESSIONS OF LAND BY INDIAN TRIBES TO THE UNITED
     STATES. 49,
       his INDIAN LAND CESSIONS IN THE UNITED STATES, _ibid._

   Roy, John B. Iowa interpreter. 70

   Roy's Ferry, 76


   Sac Indians. See Sauk Indians

   St. Anthony's Falls. See Falls of St. Anthony

   St. Croix River. 14,
       trading route, 13, _note_

   St. Joseph, Missouri, formerly Robidoux's Post. xxiii, _note_

   St. Lawrence River, 27, _note_. 28, _note_

   St. Louis County, Minnesota, 28, _note_

   St. Louis, Missouri, xxiv, 50, 52, 57, 63

   St. Malo, France, 27, _note_

   St. Paul, Minnesota. 12, _note_

   St. Peter's River, i.e., Minisoute Ouadeba or St. Peter's river of
     Jeffreys. 1762. xxiii, _note_

   St. Remi River, 11, _note_

   Salt River, 38

   Santee Sioux, ball--playing among. xxx,
       referred to, 28

   Sauk and Fox Reservation, xxxi, _note_. 2, _note_

   Sauk Indians, xvii, xxiv, xxvii, (Sac) 7, _note_. 17, (Sac) 41,
    _note_. 42, (Sac) 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 61, 62, 64, 66, 67,
     68, 69, 73, 74, 75, 76

   Saulteurs. See Ojibwa Indians

   Sauvolle, _Sieur d'_. 19, 20, _note_

   Schoolcraft, H. R. His INDIAN TRIBES OF THE UNITED STATES, referred
     to. xii, xviii, _note_. xxiii, 1, _note_. 7, 21, _ibid._, _note_. 24,
     25, 36, 37, 41, _note_

   Secretary of War, REPORT, for 1829. 1, _note_

   Seneca Indians, In Indian territory, descendants of the Eries. xi,
    _note_

   Sha--i--ena. See Cheyenne Indians

   Shakopee, Minnesota, 33

   "shaved heads," General term by which the Oto, Missouri, Sauk and
     Iowa were designated. xvii

   Shea, John Dawson Gilmary. DISCOVERY AND EXPLORATION OF
     THE MISSISSIPPI VALLEY. xv

   Shea, John Dawson Gilmary. EARLY VOYAGES UP AND DOWN THE MISSISSIPPI.
     3, _note_. 4, _note_. 12, _note_

   Shiene. See Cheyenne Indians

   Shien. See Cheyenne Indians

   SIOUAN BIBLIOGRAPHY, by Pilling. 5, _note_. 7, _note_

   Siouan family, the Iowa as an important branch of. xiii

   Siouan stock, Iowa social institutions similar to other tribes of.
     xxvii

   Sioux Indians, xix, xxi, 9, 10, 11, _note_. 14, 15, 16, _ibid._,
    _note_. 17, 18, 19, 27, 28, _note_. 31, 32, 34, 35, 36, 53, 54,
     55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 64

   Smith, John Q. Commissioner of Indian Affairs, ix

   SMITHSONIAN CONTRIBUTIONS TO KNOWLEDGE, 1852. 5, _note_

   Smithsonian Institution, xiii, 4, _note_. 5, _note_

   songs of the Iowa, xxxiv

   SOUTH DAKOTA HISTORICAL COLLECTIONS, Vol. 2. xxiv, _note_. 5, _note_

   Spirit Lake, Iowa, 23

   Stennett, W. H. His HISTORY OF THE ORIGIN OF THE PLACE NAMES CONNECTED
     WITH THE C. & N. W. R. R. 28, _note_

   Stickney, Gardner P. 14, _note_

   Sullivan, Col. --. 52

   Sulte, Benjamin. 27, _note_


   Tailhan, R. P. J. editor of Perrot's MEMOIRS. 14, _note_

   Takoha, Siouan War Prophet. 29

   Tama, Iowa, Sauk and Fox Reservation at, xxxi, _note_

   Tamaroa Indians, (Tamorois) 17

   Texas, southern and southeastern. Attacapa Indians in. x, _note_

   Thomas, Cyrus. His REPORT ON MOUND EXPLORATIONS, xxviii,
   _note_
     His article in BULL. 30 B. A. E. 16, _note_

   Three Rivers, Canada. 27, _note_

   Thwaites, Reuben Gold. 41, _note_. 42

   Ticonderoga, New York, 42

   TRAVELS IN THE INTERIOR OF NORTH AMERICA, by Maximilian. xvi, xxiii,
     _note_. xxxiv, 6, _note_. 39, _note_. 56, _note_

   tumuli, Iowa not largely associated with, xxvii


   Vanderslice, Daniel, 73

   Vaughan, Albert J. Indian agent. 40, _ibid._, _note_

   Verwyst, Rev. Chrysostom. His MISSIONARY LABORS OF FATHERS MARQUETTE,
     MENARD AND ALLOUEZ, ETC., 13, _note_

   VIES DE PLUSIEURS PERSONNAGES CELEBRES, by Walckenar. 23, _note_


   Wahkantape, a Sioux Chief, 18

   Walckenaer, C. A. His VIES DE PLUSIEURS PERSONNAGES CELEBRES, 23,
    _note_

   Walnut Creek, 74

   Wapello County, Iowa, xxvii

   war dance, The. xxxii

   Washington, D. C, 63, 66

   Waw--non--que--skoona--a, xix,
       map by, xxiii, 9, _note_. 24, 36,
       referred to, 37

   welcome dance, The. xxxii

   Williamson, Rev. T. S. His article in COLLECTIONS OF THE MINNESOTA
     HISTORICAL SOCIETY, Vol. I. xx, _note_. 28, 31

   Wilson, Rev. G. H. 28, _note_

   Winchell, N. H. His excellent map. xx, _note_. xxiii, _note_

   Winnebago Agency, in Minnesota. 7

   Winnebago Indians, x, xvii, xviii, 8, 9, 10, 17, 27, 29, 32, 35, 36,
     their territory 37, 42, 53

   Winsor, Justin. NARRATIVE AND CRITICAL HISTORY OF AMERICA. 3, _note_
     20, _note_

   WISCONSIN HISTORICAL SOCIETY COLLECTIONS, VOL. I, 13, _note_
       VOL. XI, 28, _note_
       VOL. XVI, xxii, xxiv, _note_. 13, _note_. 20, _note_
       VOL. XVII, 41, _note_

   Wisconsin River, xxi, 11, _note_. 16, 17, 23, 28

   Wisconsin State Hist. Soc. PROCEEDINGS, 1895. 28, _note_

   Wisconsin, State of. 11, _note_

   Wolf Creek, i.e., Wolf River, _q.v._

   Wolf River, xxiv, 39, 68

   Wolf Village, 76

   Wolf's Grove, 70


[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

   LITTLE HISTORIES
   OF NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS

   Number Two


_IN THE SAME SERIES_

THE NAVAJOS

By O. H. Lipps

   12mo cloth, $1.00 net       Expressage 10 cents

With a map, and illustrations in three colors

The A. L. A. BOOKLIST describes it thus (November, 1909): "A concise and
sympathetic account in simple language of the life, habits, customs,
mythology, etc., of one of the most interesting of the North American
tribes, with a chapter on their history since the Spanish conquest. The
author is a member of the Indian service, has had several years'
experience with the tribe and knows his subject. Appendix contains
official letters and affidavits relating to conditions on the
reservations and the causes of the Navajo war of 1861. Illustrated from
photographs, but unfortunately unindexed."

   970.1 Navajo Indians             9--10291/2





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Iowa, by William Harvey Miner

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IOWA ***

***** This file should be named 39952.txt or 39952.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/9/5/39952/

Produced by Brian Sogard, Turgut Dincer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

