Project Gutenberg's The Religious Tract Society Catalogue - 1889, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Religious Tract Society Catalogue - 1889

Author: Various

Release Date: July 1, 2012 [EBook #40118]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Paul Clark, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 PUBLICATIONS
 OF THE
 Religious Tract Society.


BY MRS. WALTON,

_Author of 'Shadows,' etc._

=SHADOWS.=

     Scenes and Incidents in the Life of an Old Arm-Chair. With
     Engravings by WHYMPER. Imperial 16mo, 4s. cloth boards, gilt edges.

=A PEEP BEHIND THE SCENES.=

     With Engravings by WHYMPER. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d. cloth boards, gilt
     edges; Cheap Edition, 3d. in cover.

=WAS I RIGHT?=

     With Fine Engravings. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d. cloth boards, gilt edges.

=OLIVE'S STORY.=

     OR; LIFE AT RAVENSCLIFFE. With Engravings. 2s. 6d. cloth boards,
     gilt edges.

=MY LITTLE CORNER.=

     For Mother's Meetings, etc. Illustrated. New Edition. Crown 8vo,
     1s. 6d. cloth boards.

=MY MATES AND I.=

     For Working Men and Boys. Illustrated. 1s. 6d. cloth boards.

=SAVED AT SEA.=

     A Lighthouse Story. Engravings. 1s. cloth boards.

=CHRISTIE'S OLD ORGAN;=

     OR, HOME, SWEET HOME. Illustrated. 1s. cloth boards; Cheap Edition,
     1d.

=NOBODY LOVES ME.=

     With Illustrations by M. E. EDWARDS, 1s. cloth boards.

=LITTLE FAITH;=

     OR, THE CHILD OF THE TOY STALL. Illustrated. Royal 16mo, cloth
     boards.


BY HESBA STRETTON,

_Author of 'Jessica's First Prayer,' etc._


One Shilling each.

=JESSICA'S FIRST PRAYER.=

     With Engravings. A Cheap Edition may now be had in paper covers,
     1d.

=UNDER THE OLD ROOF.=

     With Engravings.

=NO PLACE LIKE HOME.=

     With Engravings.


1s. 6d. each. Royal 16mo, cloth boards, Illustrated.

=LITTLE MEG'S CHILDREN.=

=ALONE IN LONDON.=

=MAX KROeMER: A STORY OF STRASBURG.=

=CREW OF THE DOLPHIN.=

=THE KING'S SERVANTS.=

=THE STORM OF LIFE.=

=CASSY.=

=FRIENDS TILL DEATH.= And other Stories.

=MICHAEL LORIO'S CROSS.= And other Stories.


2s. each. Crown 8vo, cloth boards, Illustrated.

=A THORNY PATH.=

=PILGRIM STREET.=

=ENOCH RODEN'S TRAINING.=

=FERN'S HOLLOW.=

=FISHERS OF DERBY HAVEN.=

=CHILDREN OF CLOVERLEY.=


=BEDE'S CHARITY.=

     With Engravings by EDWARD WHYMPER. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d. cloth boards,
     gilt edges.


=COBWEBS AND CABLES.=

     With Engravings by GORDON BROWN. Imperial 16mo, 5s. cloth boards,
     gilt edges.


=CAROLA.=

     With Engravings by EDWARD WHYMPER. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d. cloth boards.

[Illustration]




THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY'S LIST OF BOOKS.

_FOR PRESENTATION._

_The Religious Tract Society Publishes Several Thousands of Books for
all Readers, at all prices, from One Farthing to One Guinea. This List
gives the Titles of many that are suitable for presentation, but the
following Catalogues, containing full Lists of the Society's
Publications, are also issued, and will be forwarded, Post Free on
application to The Secretaries, 56, Paternoster Row, E.C.:--_

 GENERAL CATALOGUE OF BOOKS, ETC.
 CLASSIFIED LIST OF GENERAL LITERATURE.
 CLASSIFIED LIST OF TRACTS.
 ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE OF GIFT BOOKS.
 BOOKS FOR CIRCULATING LIBRARIES.
 TRACTS, HANDBILLS, LEAFLETS.
 PUBLICATIONS IN VARIOUS LANGUAGES.
 DIAGRAMS AND PICTURES FOR LECTURERS.


CHIEF OFFICE: 56, Paternoster Row, London.

A large variety of Presentation Books at all prices may be inspected at
the RETAIL DEPOTS.

LONDON: 65, ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD (_Opposite the Northern Entrance to
the Cathedral_), AND 164, PICCADILLY.

LIVERPOOL: 18, SLATER STREET. MANCHESTER: 100, CORPORATION STREET.

BRIGHTON: 31, WESTERN ROAD.




ILLUSTRATED TABLE-BOOKS.


[Illustration: Walks in Palestine]

_JUST PUBLISHED._


WALKS IN PALESTINE.

 The letterpress by HENRY A. HARPER, author of "Illustrated Letters to
     my Children from the Holy Land," etc. Illustrated by twenty-four
     photogravures from photographs taken by C. V. SHADBOLT, Esq. Royal
     Quarto. 25s. bevelled boards, gilt edges.

 _N.B.--Of this book there is also an_ edition de luxe, _limited to 100
     copies. The plates are on India paper, the letterpress on hand-made
     paper, and the volume is handsomely bound in classic vellum, with
     gilt top and uncut edges. Price 45s._

This volume forms a superb gift-book and souvenir of the Holy Land. Mr.
Shadbolt's photographs are of the highest merit, and they have been most
beautifully reproduced by Messrs. Annan and Swan. The letterpress is
from the pen of Mr. Harper, who has lived in Palestine, and is familiar
with every spot shown in the illustrations.


THE LANDS OF SCRIPTURE.

 Illustrated by Pen and Pencil. Containing "Those Holy Fields" and "The
     Land of the Pharaohs," by SAMUEL MANNING, LL.D.; and "Pictures from
     Bible Lands," by S. G. GREEN, D.D. Imperial 8vo. 21s., handsomely
     bound in cloth gilt.

This elegantly bound and profusely illustrated volume forms a very
suitable Presentation Book to a Minister, Sunday-school Superintendent,
or Teacher. It gives, in a concise and interesting form, a large amount
of information about the places mentioned in Scripture, such as would
prove of great service to every Bible student.




THE PEN AND PENCIL SERIES OF ILLUSTRATED TABLE BOOKS.


 _Imperial 8vo pp. (size of page,_ 11 _by_ 7-1/2 _inches), beautifully
     Illustrated, printed on superior paper, price_ 8_s. in handsome
     cloth, gilt edges or_ 25s. _each in morocco elegant._

[Illustration: Irish Pictures]


_Just Published._


IRISH PICTURES.

_Drawn with Pen and Pencil._

BY RICHARD LOVETT, M.A.

Author of "Norwegian Pictures," "Pictures from Holland," etc. With a map
and over one hundred Illustrations from Sketches and Photographs.
Imperial 8vo. 8s. handsome cloth boards, gilt edges, or 25s. bound in
morocco, gilt edges.

"Contains some pleasant writing on the natural beauties and antiquities
of Ireland."--_Daily Telegraph._

"The descriptions can be commended for their truth and
fulness."--_Manchester Guardian._

"A really splendid volume."--_Cork Herald._

"The illustrations are excellent."--_Irish Ecclesiastical Gazette._

 =American Pictures.= Drawn with Pen and Pencil. By SAMUEL MANNING,
     LL.D. New Edition. Profusely Illustrated. 8s. in handsome cloth
     gilt; or 25s. in morocco elegant.

"The text is clear and vigorous, and the numerous illustrations which
bear it company are a striking complement to its
descriptions."--_Guardian._

 =Italian Pictures.= Drawn with Pen and Pencil. By SAMUEL MANNING, LL.D.
     New Edition. Revised, with additions by Dr. S. G. GREEN. Profusely
     Illustrated. New Edition. 8s. handsome cloth gilt; or 25s. in
     morocco elegant.

 =French Pictures.= Drawn with Pen and Pencil. By Dr. SAMUEL G. GREEN.
     With fine Engravings. 8s. in handsome cloth gilt; or 25s. in
     morocco elegant.

"Gives a graphic notion of the general aspect of France and its
inhabitants."--_Standard._

 =Pictures from the German Fatherland.= Drawn with Pen and Pencil. By
     Dr. SAMUEL G. GREEN. With fine Engravings. 8s. handsome cloth, or
     25s. in morocco elegant.

"We can recommend the work as a capital and cheap present."--_Art
Journal._

     =Pictures from Holland.= Drawn with Pen and Pencil. By RICHARD
     LOVETT, M.A., Author of "Norwegian Pictures," etc. With one hundred
     and thirty-two illustrations. Imperial 8vo. 8s. handsome cloth,
     gilt edges; or 25s. bound in morocco elegant.

"A charming book, prettily illustrated, and prettily
written."--_Saturday Review._

"The artist has succeeded in pourtraying all the more interesting phases
of Dutch life and scenery with fidelity and spirit."--_Morning Post._




ILLUSTRATED TABLE-BOOKS.


The "PEN AND PENCIL SERIES."--_continued._

Imperial 8vo (size of page, 11 by 7-1/2 inches).

_Price Eight Shillings in handsome cloth, gilt edges; or Twenty-five
Shillings each in morocco._

 =English Pictures.= Drawn with Pen and Pencil. By SAMUEL MANNING,
     LL.D., and S. G. GREEN, D.D. With Coloured Frontispiece and
     numerous Wood Engravings. 8s. handsome cloth, or 25s. in morocco.

"Next to seeing the beautiful places of the earth comes the delight of
reading of them: and many a one who is doomed to begin and end his days
within a 'cribbed, cabined, and confined' circle, can roam, guided by
such a book, at the will of fancy, through sunny glades, by bubbling
streams, or over the breezy moorlands."--_Times._

[Illustration: English Pictures]

 =Norwegian Pictures.= Drawn with Pen and Pencil. With a glance at
     Sweden and the Gotha Canal. By RICHARD LOVETT, M.A. With a Map and
     122 Illustrations, engraved by E. WHYMPER, R. TAYLOR, and others.
     Quarto. 8s. cloth boards, gilt edges; 25s. morocco.

"One of the most charming books on Norway that has appeared for a long
time."--_Academy._

 =Scottish Pictures.= By Dr. S. G. GREEN, Author of "German Pictures,"
     "French Pictures," &c. Profusely Illustrated by Perceval Skelton,
     MacWhirter, Poot, Whymper, and other eminent Artists. 8s. handsome
     cloth; or 25s. morocco elegant.

"An excellent book for the drawing-room table."--_St. James's Gazette._

 =Canadian Pictures.= Drawn with Pen and Pencil. By the MARQUIS OF
     LORNE. With numerous fine engravings by E. Whymper, from Sketches
     by the Marquis of Lorne, Sydney Hall, and others. 8s. extra cloth
     boards gilt; or 25s. bound in morocco elegant.

"Most interesting--an extremely pleasant book."--_Saturday Review._

 =Australian Pictures.= Drawn with Pen and Pencil. By HOWARD WILLOUGHBY,
     of the "Melbourne Argus." With a large Map and Illustrations from
     Photographs and Sketches, engraved by E. Whymper and others.
     Imperial 8vo, 8s., handsome cloth, gilt edges; 25s. morocco
     elegant.

"These pictures are real, vivid, and life-like. They are written by a
man who belongs to the scenes and the people. The book, therefore, will
be a fitting memorial to tourists of what they have seen, and will at
the same time be instructive to untravelled people."--_Australasian._

 =Indian Pictures.= Drawn with Pen and Pencil. By the Rev. WILLIAM
     URWICK, M.A. Profusely Illustrated. 8s., in handsome cloth gilt;
     25s. morocco.

"The Society, in all their excellent series of 'Pictures' (which now has
included no inconsiderable part of the world), has not given to the
public a better executed or more interesting volume than
this."--_Spectator._

 =Sea Pictures.= By Dr. MACAULAY, Editor of the _Leisure Hour_, &c.
     Containing the Sea in Poetry, Physical Geography of the Sea, the
     Sea in History, and the Harvest of the Sea. 8s., in handsome cloth;
     or 25s. in morocco elegant.

Mr. Ruskin says:--"This beautiful book is by far the best I have ever
seen on the subject, and will be a most precious gift-book for me."

 ="Those Holy Fields."= Palestine Illustrated by Pen and Pencil. By the
     late Rev. SAMUEL MANNING, LL.D. With numerous Engravings. 8s.,
     handsome cloth gilt; 25s. morocco.

 =Pictures from Bible Lands.= Drawn with Pen and Pencil. Edited by the
     Rev. S. G. GREEN, D.D. The Engravings by Edward Whymper and others.
     8s., handsome cloth gilt; 25s. morocco.

New Edition. Just Published.

 =The Land of the Pharaohs.= Egypt and Sinai. Illustrated by Pen and
     Pencil. By the late Rev. SAMUEL MANNING, LL.D. With numerous fine
     Engravings. 8s. handsome cloth gilt; or 25s. in morocco.

 =Swiss Pictures.= Drawn with Pen and Pencil. By SAMUEL MANNING, LL.D.
     With numerous Illustrations. 8s., handsome cloth gilt; 25s.
     morocco.




ILLUSTRATED GIFT-BOOKS.


[Illustration: Victoria R.I. signature] Her Life and Reign.

 By Dr. MACAULAY, Author of "Sea Pictures," "Luther Anecdotes," "Gordon
     Anecdotes," etc. With Five Portraits of the Queen, and Sixty
     Engravings by Edward Whymper and others. Small Quarto. 10s. 6d.
     cloth, gilt edges.

"The author's endeavour has been to recall those qualities in the
personal character of the Queen and the incidents in her life which have
most endeared her to her people."--_Illustrated London News._

"It is a beautifully printed and very prettily illustrated volume, and
is admirable in tone and feeling."--_Athenaeum._

"A very acceptable gift-book."--_Stamford Mercury._

[Illustration: Victoria R.I.]

 =Winter Pictures.= By Poet and Artist. An elegant book, most
     appropriate for Seasonable Presentation. Profusely Illustrated by
     EDWARD WHYMPER. 4to., 6s., cloth boards gilt.

"The wood engravings by Mr. Edward Whymper are designed in accordance
with the subject and tone of the poems selected by the editor, whose
choice does credit to his taste and judgment."--_Illustrated London
News._

 =The Crown of Flowers.= Poems and Pictures from "The Girl's Own Paper."
     Edited by CHARLES PETERS, with Illustrations by M. E. Edwards,
     Davidson Knowles, Frank Dicksee, A.R.A., R. Catterson Smith, Robert
     Barnes, Charles Green, John C. Staples, C. H. Edwards, O'Kelly, J.
     McL. Ralston, William Small, Frank Dadd, and other eminent artists.
     6s. handsome cloth gilt.

"This book cannot fail to be most acceptable as a prize or present to
young ladies, who will find in it at once a source of pleasure and
profit."--_Queen._

 =The Harvest of a Quiet Eye=; or, Leisure Thoughts for Busy Lives. By
     the Rev. J. R. VERNON, M.A. With numerous Engravings. New Edition.
     6s. 6d. cloth, gilt edges.

"I never saw anything more gracefully or more rightly done--more
harmoniously pleasant in text and illustration."--_Mr. Ruskin._

 =Ingleside and Wayside Musings.= A companion volume to "The Harvest of
     a Quiet Eye." 6s. cloth gilt.

 =Random Truths in Common Things.= Occasional Papers from my Study
     Chair. By the Rev. J. R. VERNON, M.A., author of "The Harvest of a
     Quiet Eye." Illustrations. 7s. cloth gilt.

"It seems even better than 'The Harvest of a Quiet Eye.'"--_Mr. Ruskin._

"Should be placed next to Wordsworth on every student's
bookshelf."--_Standard._

 =The Life of Jesus Christ the Saviour.= By Mrs. S. WATSON. With many
     fine Engravings. 5s. cloth.

"For young people to read, or to help a teacher in lighting up a
narrative of the one perfect life, and interesting young people in all
its parts and details, we have seen no better volume of the kind than
this."--_Methodist Recorder._


Dr. Stoughton's Reformation Books.

 =The Spanish Reformers, their Memories and Dwelling Places.= By Dr.
     STOUGHTON. Finely Illustrated. 8s. handsome cloth gilt.

"A most interesting and instructive volume."--_Spectator._

 =Footprints of Italian Reformers.= By Dr. STOUGHTON. Finely
     Illustrated. 8s. handsome cloth gilt.

"A very charming and useful gift-book."--_Congregationalist._

 =Homes and Haunts of Luther.= By Dr. STOUGHTON. Finely Illustrated. 8s.
     handsome cloth, gilt edges.




A USEFUL SET FOR PRESENTATION

To a Minister or Sunday School Teacher.


[Illustration: Books]




By-Paths of Bible Knowledge.


"The volumes which the Tract Society is issuing under the above title
fully deserve success. They have been entrusted to scholars who have a
special acquaintance with the subjects about which they severally
treat."--_The Athenaeum._

 1. =Cleopatra's Needle.= By the Rev. J. KING, Lecturer for the
     Palestine Exploration Fund. With Illustrations. 2s. 6d.

 2. =Fresh Light from the Ancient Monuments.= By A. H. SAYCE, LL.D.,
     Deputy Professor of Comparative Philology, Oxford, etc. With
     Facsimiles from Photographs. 3s.

 3. =Recent Discoveries on the Temple Hill at Jerusalem.= By the Rev. J.
     KING, M.A., Lecturer for the Palestine Exploration Fund. With Maps,
     Plans, and Illustrations. 2s. 6d.

 4. =Babylonian Life and History.= By E. A. WALLIS BUDGE, M.A.,
     Cambridge, Assistant in the Department of Oriental Antiquities,
     British Museum. 3s.

 5. =Galilee in the Time of Christ.= By SELAH MERRILL, D.D., Author of
     "East of the Jordan." With a Map. 2s. 6d.

 6. =Egypt and Syria.= Their Physical Features in Relation to Bible
     History. By Sir J. W. DAWSON, F.G.S., F.R.S. With many
     Illustrations. 3s.

 7. =Assyria: Its Princes, Priests, and People.= By A. H. SAYCE, M.A.,
     LL.D. Illustrated. 3s.

 8. =The Dwellers on the Nile.= Chapters on the Life, Literature,
     History, and Customs of Ancient Egypt. By E. A. WALLIS BUDGE, M.A.,
     of the British Museum. Illustrated. 3s.

 9. =The Diseases of the Bible.= By Sir J. RISDON BENNETT, M.D., F.R.S.,
     Ex-President of the Royal College of Physicians. 2s. 6d.

 10. =Trees and Plants of the Bible.= By W. H. GROSER, B.SC.
     Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 3s. cloth.

 11. =Animals of the Bible.= By H. CHICHESTER HART, B.A., Naturalist to
     Sir G. Nares' Arctic Expedition and Professor Hull's Palestine
     Expedition. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 3s.




HANDSOME GIFT-BOOKS

FOR

Young Men and Maidens.

[Illustration: Girl's Own Indoor Book]

 =Girl's Own Indoor Book.= Edited by CHARLES PETERS. 528 pages, 8-1/2 x
     6-1/2. With over one hundred and fifty illustrations. 8s. cloth,
     gilt edges.

 Containing practical helps to Girls in all matters relating to their
     material comfort and moral well-being. By the Author of "How to be
     Happy though Married," Dora de Blaquiere, Dora Hope, Marie Karger,
     Lady Macfarren, Lady Lindsay, Ernst Pauer, Sir John Stainer, the
     Hon. Victoria Grosvenor, John C. Staples, Canon Fleming, "Medicus,"
     Ruth Lamb, Sophia Caulfeild, and many others.

[Illustration: Indoor Games]

 =Indoor Games and Recreations.= A popular Encyclopaedia for Boys. Edited
     by G. A. HUTCHISON. Including chapters by J. N. MASKELYNE,
     Lieut.-Col. CUTHELL, Dr. GORDON STABLES, R.N., Rev. A. N. MALAN, M.
     A., C. STANSFIELD-HICKS, Dr. STRADLING, and others. "Boy's Own
     Bookshelf." Vol. VIII. With many Engravings. Quarto. 8s. cloth
     boards, gilt edges. A splendid Gift-Book or Prize for Boys. 528
     pages, 8-1/2 x 6-1/2.

[Illustration: The Handy Natural History]

 =The Handy Natural History.= By the Rev. J. G. WOOD, author of "Homes
     without Hands," etc., etc. 368 pages, 8 x 6-1/2 With 224
     Engravings. 8s. cloth boards, gilt edges.

 "A delightful book, and will make a very handsome and enviable
     high-class prize or present."--_School Board Chronicle._

 "A handsome volume, in which the author, a well-known naturalist, tells
     his readers in simple, untechnical language the habits and nature
     of birds, beasts, and reptiles. Mr. Wood's style is excellently
     adapted for attracting the interest and insuring the attention of
     even ordinarily careless readers."--_Mail._




THE SUNFLOWERS SERIES

OF STORIES FOR ALL READERS.


This is a Series of Books intended for adults rather than children.
Large numbers of young people, as well as readers of older growth, give
up much of their time to fiction. This Series supplies books which not
only interest as well-written Stories that afford studies of character
and descriptions of events and scenes likely to rivet the attention, but
which also stimulate the serious thought, and develop the better nature
of those into whose hands they fall.

 =The Manse of Glen Clunie.= By EGLANTON THORNE, author of "The Old
     Worcester Jug," "The Two Crowns," etc. Illustrated by CHARLES
     WHYMPER, Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. cloth.

 [Illustration: Two Enthusiasts]

 =Two Enthusiasts.= By E. EVERETT GREEN. Illustrated by EDWARD WHYMPER.
     Crown 8vo. 5s. cloth boards.

 =Barbara's Brothers.= By E. EVERETT GREEN, Author of "Lenore
     Annandale's Story," "Joint Guardians," etc. Illustrated by R. and
     E. TAYLOR. Crown 8vo. 5s. cloth boards.

 =Joint Guardians.= By E. EVERETT GREEN. Illustrated. 5s. cloth.

 =Joyce Graham's History=; or, Overcoming Evil with Good. By H. A.
     GOWRING. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

 =Another King.= By JANET EDEN. Illustrated by E. WHYMPER. Crown 8vo.
     3s. 6d. cloth.

 =The Head of the House.= A Story of Victory over Passion and Pride. By
     E. E. GREEN. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 5s.

 =Ida Nicolari.= By EGLANTON THORNE. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

 =The Old Manuscript=; or, Anaise Robineau's History. A Tale of the
     Huguenots of La Vendee. By BLANCHE M. MOGGRIDGE. Illustrated by E.
     WHYMPER. Crown 8vo. 5s. cloth.

 =Young Sir Richard.= By H. FREDERICK CHARLES. Illustrated. Crown 8vo.
     5s. cloth.

 =Maddalena, the Waldensian Maiden and her People.= Translated by JULIE
     SUTTER. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. cloth.

 =Turning Points=; or, Two Years in Maud Vernon's Life. By L. C. SILKE.
     Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. cloth.

 =Reaping the Whirlwind.= A Story of Three Lives. Illustrated. Crown
     8vo. 3s. 6d. cloth.

 =One Day at a Time.= By BLANCHE E. M. GRENE. Illustrated by E. WHYMPER.
     Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. cloth.

 =The Mistress of Lydgate Priory=; or, the Story of a Long Life. By
     EVELYN E. GREEN. Crown 8vo. 5s.

 =The Two Crowns.= By EGLANTON THORNE. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo.
     3s. 6d. cloth.

 =Lenore Annandale's Story.= By EVELYN E. GREEN. With Illustrations.
     Crown 8vo. 5s. cloth.

 =Carola.= By HESBA STRETTON. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

 [Illustration: Sunflowers]

 =Sunflowers.= A Story of To-day. By G. C. GEDGE. Illustrated. Crown
     8vo. 3s. 6d. cloth.




ILLUSTRATED ANNUALS

FOR PRESENTATION.


[Illustration: The Leisure Hour]


The Leisure Hour.

Annual Volume for 1888.

"Behold in these what leisure hours demand Amusement and true knowledge
hand in hand."

The Volume for 1888 of this Monthly Magazine for Family and General
Reading contains 856 Imperial 8vo. pages (11 x 7-1/2) of interesting
reading, with numerous Illustrations by Eminent Artists. It forms a
handsome Book for Presentation, and an appropriate and instructive
volume for a School or College Prize. Price 7s. in cloth boards; 8s. 6d.
extra boards, gilt edges; 10s. 6d. half-bound in calf.


[Illustration: The Sunday at Home]


The Sunday at Home.

Annual Volume for 1888.

AN ILLUSTRATED FAMILY MAGAZINE FOR SABBATH READING.

This Volume for 1888 forms a very suitable Book for Presentation. It
contains 828 pages, Imperial 8vo (11 x 7-1/2), with a great variety of
Interesting and Instructive Sabbath Reading for every Member of the
Family. It is profusely illustrated by Coloured and Wood Engravings.
Price 7s. cloth boards; 8s. 6d. extra boards, gilt edges; 10s. 6d.
half-bound in calf.


[Illustration: The Girl's Own Annual]


The Girl's Own Annual.

The Ninth Volume of "The Girl's Own Paper,"--containing 848 Demy 4to (11
x 8-1/4) pages of interesting and useful reading. Stories by popular
writers; Music by eminent composers; Practical Papers for Young
Housekeepers; Medical Papers by a well-known practitioner; Needlework,
plain and fancy; Helpful Papers for Christian Girls; Papers on
Reasonable and Seasonable Dress, etc., etc. Profusely illustrated. Price
8s. in handsome cloth; 9s. 6d. with gilt edges; 12s. 6d. half-morocco.


[Illustration: The Boy's Own Annual]


The Boy's Own Annual

FOR 1888.

The Tenth Annual Volume of the "Boy's Own Paper." Containing 848 large
pages (11-3/4 x 8-1/2) of Tales of Schoolboy Life, and of Adventure on
Land and Sea; Outdoor and Indoor Games for every Season; Perilous
Adventures at Home and Abroad; Amusements for Summer and Winter; and
Instructive Papers written so as to be read by boys and youths. With
many Coloured and Wood Engravings. Price 8s. handsome cloth; 9s. 6d.
gilt edges; 12s. 6d. half-morocco.




NEW EDITIONS OF STORIES

BY

HESBA STRETTON.


 =The Children of Cloverley.= Illustrated. 2s. cloth.

 [Illustration: Little Meg's Children]

 =Little Meg's Children.= Illustrated. 1s. 6d. cloth.

 =Alone in London.= Illustrated. 1s. 6d. cloth.

 =Bede's Charity.= Illustrated. 2s. 6d. cloth.

 =Carola.= Illustrated. 3s. 6d. cloth.

 =Cassy.= Illustrated. 1s. 6d. cloth.

 =Cobwebs and Cables.= Illustrated. 5s. cloth gilt.

 =The Crew of the Dolphin.= Illustrated. 1s. 6d. cloth.

 =Enoch Roden's Training.= Illustrated. 2s. cloth.

 [Illustration: Fern's Hollow]

 =Fern's Hollow.= Illustrated. 2s. cloth.

 =Fishers of Derby Haven.= Illustrated. 2s. cloth.

 =Friends Till Death.= Illustrated. 6d. cloth.

 =Jessica's First Prayer.= Illustrated. 1s. cloth.

 =Pilgrim Street.= A Story of Manchester Life. 2s. cloth.

 =The King's Servants.= Illustrated. 1s. 6d.

 =Lost Gip.= Illustrated. 1s. 6d. cloth.

 =Max Kromer.= A Story of the Siege of Strasbourg. 1s. 6d. cloth.

 =No Place Like Home.= Illustrated. 1s. cloth.

 =The Storm of Life.= Illustrated. 1s. 6d. cloth.

 =A Thorny Path.= Illustrated. 2s. cloth.

 =Under the Old Roof.= Illustrated. 1s. cloth.

 =A Night and a Day.= 9d. cloth.

 =Left Alone.= 6d. cloth.

 =A Miserable Christmas and a Happy New Year.= 9d. cloth.

 =The Worth of a Baby.= 6d. cloth.

 =Sam Franklin's Savings Bank.= 6d. cloth.

 =Michel Lorio's Cross.= Illustrated. 6d. cloth.




By Mrs. O. F. WALTON.


 =Christie's Old Organ=; or, Home, Sweet Home. 1s. cloth.

 =Angel's Christmas.= 16mo. 6d. cloth.

 =Launch the Lifeboat.= With 44 Coloured Pictures or Vignettes. 4to. 3s.
     coloured cover.

 =Little Dot.= Coloured Frontispiece. 6d. cloth.

 =Little Faith=; or, The Child of the Toy-Stall. 1s. cloth.

 =Nobody Loves Me.= Royal 16mo. 1s. cloth.

 =Olive's Story=; or, Life at Ravenscliffe. 2s. 6d. cloth, gilt edges.

 =Was I Right?= Fine Engravings. Imp. 16mo. 3s. 6d. cloth, gilt edges.

 =Our Gracious Queen=: Pictures and Stories from Her Majesty's Life.
     With many Pictures. New and Revised Edition. 1s. cloth.

 =A Peep Behind the Scenes.= Imp. 16mo. 3s. 6d. cloth, gilt edges.

 =Poppie's Presents.= Crown 8vo. 1s. cloth.

 =Saved at Sea.= A Lighthouse Story. New and cheaper Edition. 1s. cloth.

 =Shadows.= Scenes in the Life of an Old Arm-Chair. Imp. 16mo. 4s.
     cloth, gilt edges.

 =Taken or Left.= Crown 8vo. 1s. cloth.




BOYS' STORY BOOKS.


[Illustration: Ernest Hepburn]

 =Ernest Hepburn=; or, Revenge and Forgiveness. By H. C. ADAMS, M.A.,
     Vicar of Old Shoreham. Illustrated by E. WHYMPER. Crown 8vo. 5s.
     cloth boards.

 =Drake and the Dons=; or, Stirring Tales of Armada Times. Edited and
     Arranged by RICHARD LOVETT, M.A. With Portraits, Maps, and
     Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. cloth boards, gilt edges.

 =What to Read at Winter Entertainments.= Part I.--Verse. Part
     II.--Prose. Edited and arranged by Rev. FREDERICK LANGBRIDGE, M.A.,
     Author of "Sent Back by the Angels," "Poor Folk's Lives," etc. Each
     1s. 6d. cloth boards.

 =The Latch Key=; By T. S. MILLINGTON, Author of "A Great Mistake,"
     "Through Fire and through Water," etc. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 2s.
     cloth boards.

 =More than Conqueror=; or, A Boy's Temptations. By HARRIETTE E. BURCH.
     Author of "The Heroines of Haarlem," etc. Illustrated. Crown 8vo.
     2s. cloth.

 =Marching Orders=; or, Soldier Bobbie. By LUCY TAYLOR, Author of "Led
     into Light," "Sundial Court," etc. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.
     cloth boards.

 =Geoffrey Heywood=; or, The Right Way. By Mrs. COOPER, Author of
     "Nearly in Port," etc. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d. cloth
     boards.

 =Sailor Jack.= A Tale of the Southern Sea. By CONSTANCE CROSS, Author
     of "After Twenty Years," etc. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 1s.
     6d. cloth boards.

 =All for Number One=; or, Charlie Russell's Ups and Downs. A Story for
     Boys and Girls. By HENRY JOHNSON, Author of "True to His Vow," etc.
     Illustrated by E. WHYMPER. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. cloth boards, gilt
     edges.

 =Hindered and Help.= A story for Boys. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 2s.
     cloth boards.

 =Untrue to his Trust.= A Story of Life and Adventure in Charles the
     Second's Time. By HENRY JOHNSON. Illustrated. 5s. cloth gilt.

 =The Doctor's Experiment.= By the Author of "Under Fire." With
     Illustrations. Imperial 16mo. 5s. cloth, gilt edges.

 =The Captain's Story of LIFE IN JAMAICA.= With Illustrations by JOHN
     GILBERT. Imperial 16mo. 5s. cloth boards, gilt edges.

 =Once upon a Time=; or, The Boy's Book of Adventures. With
     Illustrations. 3s. cloth.

 =Stories of the Old Romans.= By S. S. PUGH. Illustrated. 3s. cloth.

 =Historic Landmarks in the Christian Centuries.= By RICHARD HEATH. With
     Eighty-four Illustrations. 4to. 10s. handsome cloth gilt.


The Boy's Own Bookshelf.

 =Adventures of a Three-Guinea Watch.= By TALBOT BAINES REED. With
     Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. cloth boards.

 =Football.= A Popular Handbook of the Game. By Dr. IRVINE, C. W.
     ALCOCK, and other recognised authorities. With Illustrations. Crown
     8vo. 1s. 6d. cloth.

 =Cricket.= A Popular Handbook of the Game. By Dr. W. G. GRACE, Rev. J.
     PYCROFT, Lord CHARLES RUSSELL, F. GALE, and others. 2s. cloth.

 =A Great Mistake=: A Tale of Adventure. By T. S. MILLINGTON. With
     Illustrations. 3s. 6d. cloth.

 =The Fifth Form at St. Dominic's.= A School Story. By TALBOT BAINES
     REED. With Illustrations. 5s. cloth.

 =Through Fire and Through Water.= A Story of Adventure and Peril. By T.
     S. MILLINGTON. Illustrated. 3s. 6d. cloth.

 [Illustration: Harold, the Boy Earl]

 =Harold, the Boy Earl.= A Story of Old England. By J. F. HODGETTS,
     Author of "Eric the Norseman." 3s. 6d. cloth.




BOOKS FOR GIRLS.


[Illustration: Grace Trevelyan]

 =Grace Trevelyan=; or, Led into Light. By Mrs. COOTE, Author of "The
     Sure Harvest," "The First Gift," etc. Illustrated by E. WHYMPER.
     Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. cloth boards, gilt edges.

 =May, "a Succourer of Many."= By Miss A. G. GRAY-JONES. With
     Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 2s. cloth boards.

 =Dorothy Tresilis.= A Cornish Tale. By M. M. POLLARD, Author of
     "Lilla's Experiment," "Only Me," etc. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 1s.
     6d. cloth boards.

 =Miss Elsie.= A Story of Single-hearted Service. By H. MARY WILSON.
     Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d. cloth boards.

 "=Therefore=," or Nessie's Ideal. A Story for Girls. By FLORENCE E.
     BURCH, author of "Joseph Adams," etc. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 2s.
     cloth boards.

 =John Richmond's Mistake.= By JANET EDEN, author of "Hester's Home,"
     "Another King," etc. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d. cloth boards.

 =In a Jesuit Net.= By A. C. COAPE, Author of "The Chateau de Louard,"
     etc. Illustrated by EDWARD WHYMPER. Crown 8vo. 5s. cloth boards.

 =Mrs. Morse's Girls.= A Story of American Sunday School Life.
     Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d cloth boards, gilt edges.

 =The Heroines of Haarlem.= Adapted from the French of Madame de Witt.
     By HARRIETTE E. BURCH, Author of "Count Renneberg's Treason," etc.
     With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. cloth, gilt edges.

 =Higher Up.= By NELLIE HELLIS, Author of "Three Little Fiddlers,"
     "Roving Robin," "Gipsy Jan," etc. etc. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 2s.
     cloth boards.

 =Hope Reed's Upper Windows.= By HOWE BENNING. 3s. 6d. cloth gilt.

 =Dolly.= A Quiet Story for Quiet People. By M. F. W. Illustrated. Crown
     8vo. 1s. 6d. cloth boards.

 =Every Day.= A Story for Sunday Afternoons. By EVELYN R. FARRAR.
     Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 1s. 6d. cloth boards.


The Girl's Own Bookshelf.

[Illustration: Aunt Diana]

 =Aunt Diana.= By ROSA NOUCHETTE CAREY, Author of "Not Like Other
     Girls," "Esther Cameron's Story," etc. Illustrated. Imperial 16mo.
     2s. 6d. bevelled boards.

Miss Carey is well known as an able and graceful writer of stories for
girls. This one Illustrates the working of duty founded upon Christian
principle.

     =Cora=; or, Three Years of a Girl's Life. Illustrated. Imperial
     16mo. 2s. 6d. cloth.

     =The Girl's Own Cookery Book.= By PHILLIS BROWNE. Fcap. 8vo. 1s.
     cloth.

     =The Queen o' the May.= By ANNE BEALE. Illustrated. Imperial 16mo.
     2s. 6d. cloth.

     =The Master's Service.= A Practical Guide for Girls. Illustrated.
     Imperial 16mo. 2s. 6d. cloth.

     =How to Play the Pianoforte.= Fcap. 8vo. 1s. 6d. cloth.

     =Her Object in Life.= By ISABELLA FYVIE MAYO. Illustrated. Imperial
     16mo. 2s. 6d. cloth.

     =The Sunbeam of the Factory=, and other Stories. Illustrated.
     Imperial 16mo. 2s. 6d. cloth.

     =Esther.= By ROSA NOUCHETTE CAREY. Illustrated. Imperial 16mo. 3s.
     6d. cloth.

     =The Shepherd's Fairy.= By DARLEY DALE, Author of "The Great Auk's
     Eggs." Illustrated. 2s. 6d. cloth.

     =Servants and Service.= By RUTH LAMB. Author of "Comfortable Mrs.
     Crook," etc. 1s. 6d. cloth boards.




THE NEW SERIES OF HALF-CROWN BOOKS FOR ALL READERS.


_Each with 384 Pages, 7-1/2 x 5. Illustrated. Cloth, Gilt Edges._

[Illustration: Chronicles of an Old Manor House]

 =Chronicles of an Old Manor House.= By the late G. E. SARGENT, author
     of "The Story of a Pocket Bible," etc. 2s. 6d.

 =A Race for Life=, and other Tales. 2s 6d. cloth, gilt edges.

 =Strange Tales of Peril and Adventure.= Illustrated. 2s. 6d. cloth
     gilt.

 =Remarkable Adventures from Real Life.= Illustrated. 2s. 6d. cloth
     gilt.

 =The Black Troopers=, and other Stories. Illustrated. 2s. 6d. cloth
     gilt.

 =Adventures Ashore and Afloat.= Illustrated. 2s 6d. cloth gilt.

 =Finding Her Place.= By HOWE BENNING, Author of "Quiet Corners,"
     "Ursula's Beginnings," etc. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d. cloth
     gilt.

 =The Mountain Path.= By LILY WATSON. Author of "Within Sight of the
     Snow," etc. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d. cloth gilt.

 =Among the Mongols.= By Rev. J. GILMOUR. Illustrated. 2s. 6d. cloth
     gilt.

 =Within Sea Walls=; or, How the Dutch kept the Faith. By G. E. SARGENT.
     Illustrated. 2s. 6d. cloth gilt.

 =The Story of a City Arab.= With Portrait and Memoir of the Author, the
     late G. E. SARGENT. 2s. 6d. cloth gilt.


A PRETTY PRESENT.

 =Morning and Evening.= Keble's Morning and Evening Hymns. Beautifully
     illustrated from sketches by J. CLARK, J. H. HIPSLEY, DAVIDSON
     KNOWLES, JAMES N. LEE, C. J. STANILAND, J. R. WELLS, and C. M.
     WIMPERIS. Printed in colour by ALFRED COOKE. In a handsome coloured
     cover, tied with ribbon. Square 16mo. 1s.


COLOURED BOOKLETS.

 =Signals for the Voyage of Life and Heavenly Graces.= With Verses by
     MARY E. ROPES.

Two attractive little coloured books, each consisting of twenty-four
pages, with a cover. The Texts are given in illuminated letters, and the
Verses are from the practised pen of Miss Ropes. The booklets are
finished with gilt edges, rounded corners, and tied with ribbon. 6d.
each.




BOOKS FOR CHILDREN.


[Illustration: The Happiest Half-Hour]

 =The Happiest Half-Hour=; or, Sunday Talks with Children. By FREDERICK
     LANGBRIDGE, M.A. With many Illustrations. Small quarto. 3s. 6d.
     cloth boards, gilt edges.

 =The Sweet Story of Old.= A Sunday Book for the Little Ones. By HESBA
     STRETTON. Author of "Jessica's First Prayer," "Bede's Charity,"
     etc. With Twelve Coloured Pictures by R. W. MADDOX. 4to. 3s. 6d.
     cloth boards, coloured edges.

 =Watts's Divine and Moral Songs.= New Edition. With many fine Coloured
     Illustrations by ROBERT BARNES, GORDON BROWNE, R. W. MADDOX, and J.
     R. LEE. 2s. 6d. cloth boards.

 =My Holiday Picture-Book.= Comprising: Holiday Time in the
     Country--Contented Johnnie--The Children of the Bible--The Busy
     Farm; or, a Visit to our Country Friends--Amy's Birthday
     Present--The Bible Picture Alphabet. With Coloured Pictures. 2s.
     6d. cloth.

 =My Coloured Picture Story-Book.= With Twenty-four full-coloured page
     Pictures and Forty Vignettes. Comprising: Our Pretty
     Village--Little Antoine and the Bear--Rosa, the Little Cousin from
     India--The Blackbird's Nest. 4s. handsome cloth gilt.

 =Bible Stories and Pictures.= With Twenty-four Coloured page Pictures
     and Forty Vignettes. With simple letterpress in large type. 4s.
     handsomely bound, cloth gilt.

 =Harrison Weir's Pictures of Birds and other Family Pets.= With 24
     large Coloured Pictures. 5s. handsomely bound, with side in Gold
     and Colours.

 =Storyland.= By SIDNEY GREY. With Thirty-two Illustrations by ROBERT
     BARNES. Engraved and Printed in Colour by EDMUND EVANS. 6s.
     handsomely bound in coloured paper boards.

 =Our Pets and Companions=: Pictures and Stories Illustrative of
     Kindness to Animals. By MARY K. MARTIN, Author of "Fruits of Bible
     Lands," etc. Profusely Illustrated by WEIR, STACEY, WHYMPER, M. E.
     EDWARDS, I. G. BRITTAIN, and others. Small 4to. 2s. cloth boards.

 [Illustration: Talkative Friends]

 =Talkative Friends in Field, Farm, and Forest.= By MARY E. ROPES,
     Author of "Tom's Bennie," "Till the Sugar Melts," etc. Profusely
     Illustrated. A similar Volume to "Our Pets and Companions." Small
     4to. 2s. cloth boards.

 =Little Dot and Her Friends.= With Twenty-four Coloured Pictures and
     Forty Vignettes. 4s. cloth boards gilt.

 =Launch the Lifeboat!= By Mrs. O. F. WALTON, Author of "Christie's Old
     Organ," etc. With Coloured Pictures and Vignettes, from Drawings by
     H. J. RHODES. Beautifully printed in Colours. 4to. 3s. in
     attractive boards.

 =Sunday Afternoons at Rose Cottage.= Bible Talks with Mamma. By Mrs.
     WATERWORTH, Author of "Blessings for the Little Ones," etc. In very
     large type. With Illustrations. 1s. 6d. cloth gilt.

 =Listening to Jesus.= A Sunday Book for the Little Ones. By E. M.
     WATERWORTH. With Illustrations by W. S. STACEY. Small 4to. 1s. 6d.
     cloth boards, gilt edges.

 =Children's Daily Bread.= A Picture, Text and Verse for Every Day of
     the Year. 2s. 6d. cloth.

 =Bible Tales for Children.= With Forty full-page Illustrations. Small
     4to. 3s. 6d. cloth bevelled boards, gilt edges.

 =Stories of Bible Children.= A New Sunday Book for very Little
     Children. By Mrs. E. M. WATERWORTH. In very large type. With
     Illustrations. Small 4to. 1s. 6d. cloth boards, gilt edges.




POPULAR ANNUALS.


THE Child's Companion AND _Juvenile Instructor Annual_ FOR 1888.

[Illustration: Child's Companion]

192 pages. 8-1/2 by 6-1/2.

Contains a Story in twelve chapters by Mrs. O. F. WALTON, Author of
"Christie's Old Organ," &c., and a variety of interesting reading for
young folks, with a Coloured Frontispiece and many Illustrations. 1s.
6d. attractive coloured boards; 2s. neat cloth; 2s. 6d. handsome cloth
full gilt.


Our Little Dot's Annual for 1888.

[Illustration: Our Little Dots]

192 pages. 8-1/2 by 6-1/2.

_The Yearly Volume of_

"OUR LITTLE DOTS."

Full of Pretty Pictures and Little Stories in Large Type. 1s. 6d.
attractive coloured boards; 2s. neat cloth; 2s 6d. handsome cloth gilt.

"Just what children will like."--_Church Sunday School Magazine._


The Cottager and Artisan Annual. THE VOLUME FOR 1888.

[Illustration: Cottager and Artisan]

It contains 144 pages of interesting reading and illustrations. A most
suitable book to present to the Workmen's Institute, Club, or Reading
Room, and for the Home Reading of Working People in Town and Country.
Many Large Pictures, forming quite a family scrap-book. Much of the
letterpress is in large type. 1s. 6d. in pretty coloured cover; 2s. 6d.
cloth boards gilt.

Size of page 13-1/2 by 10.

"Telling pictures and practical articles. We only wish that any praise
of ours might increase the circulation of a most valuable
periodical."--_The Times._

"A large amount of good reading for those who have little time or
opportunity. The type is large and clear, and the Illustrations numerous
and good."--_Scottish Leader._

"A welcome addition to the homes of the working classes."--_Western
Morning News._


The Tract Magazine Annual for 1888.

[Illustration: The Tract Magazine]

240 pages. 8-3/4 by 5.

Contains a complete story in fourteen chapters by Mrs. C. NUGENT
JACKSON, Author of "Me and Jim," &c., entitled "The Family Foe," and
contributions by P. B. POWER, M.A., A. N. MACKRAY, M.A., M. E. BECK, R.
R. THOM, LUCY TAYLOR, C. H. SPURGEON, JAMES GILMOUR, and others. With
numerous Engravings. 1s. 6d. cloth boards.


Friendly Greetings.

_ILLUSTRATED READINGS FOR THE PEOPLE._

[Illustration: Friendly Greetings]

208 pages. 10-3/4 by 7-1/2.

This Illustrated Magazine is bound in half-yearly volumes. Filled with
Pictures and short anecdotal papers. Each half-yearly volume complete in
itself, and profusely Illustrated. 2s. 6d. cloth boards.

"Lively, entertaining readings. The illustrations are also very
attractive."--_The Christian._




MAGAZINES FOR EVERY HOUSEHOLD.


[Illustration: Boy's Own Paper]

SIXPENCE MONTHLY. ONE PENNY WEEKLY.

THE BOY'S OWN PAPER.

"It appeals directly to every youth, whether he loves fiction or field
sports, and has a charm even for boys of maturer age."--_Daily
Telegraph._

_New Volume commenced with November Monthly Part._


[Illustration: The Sunday At Home]

SIXPENCE MONTHLY. ONE PENNY WEEKLY.

THE SUNDAY AT HOME.

"The SUNDAY AT HOME is made for Sunday reading, but there is,
nevertheless, nothing vapid, goody-goody or childish about it, but
rather writing and story-telling of unquestionable merit, obviously done
by skilled hands, and put together by a competent and experienced
editor."--_Medical Press._

_New Volume commenced with January Part._


[Illustration: The Girl's Own Paper]

SIXPENCE MONTHLY. ONE PENNY WEEKLY.

THE GIRL'S OWN PAPER.

"It bears the reflection on every page of that inimitable character, the
bright, sensible, lady-like English girl."--_The Bookseller._

_New Volume commenced with November Monthly Part._


[Illustration: The Leisure Hour]

NEW SERIES. SIXPENCE MONTHLY.

THE LEISURE HOUR.

_A Monthly Magazine for Family and General Reading._

"The LEISURE HOUR is, if possible, better than it used to be, and
certainly its literary and artistic merits are unsurpassed in the domain
of cheap and good serial publications."--_The Queen._

_A New Volume commenced with the January Part._




    Transcriber's Note:

    Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
    possible. Some minor changes of punctuation have been made.

    Italic text has been marked with _underscores_.
    Bold text has been marked with =equals signs=.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Religious Tract Society Catalogue
- 1889, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY ***

***** This file should be named 40118.txt or 40118.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/1/1/40118/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Paul Clark, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

