The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Early Introduction of Bogus Freemasonry
in the United States of America and Texas Among Colored Masons, by Charles L. Mitchell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Early Introduction of Bogus Freemasonry in the United States of America and Texas Among Colored Masons

Author: Charles L. Mitchell

Release Date: July 14, 2012 [EBook #40234]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EARLY INTRODUCTION OF ***




Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









    THE EARLY INTRODUCTION OF

    BOGUS FREEMASONRY
      IN THE
      UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
      AND TEXAS
    AMONG COLORED MASONS

    Copyrighted February 23, 1909, by Chas. L. Mitchell
    San Antonio, Texas

    PRICE 25 CENTS


    Complied by
    C. L. MITCHELL, 33 deg.
    Grand Master of M. W. King Solomon Grand Lodge A. F. & A. M.
    of Texas

    And Grand Auditor General H. E. of the United Supreme Council
    of A. A. Scottish Rites for the Southern and Western Masonic
    Jurisdiction of the United States of America

    THE ARMSTRONG CO. SAN ANTONIO, TEXAS




Preface


In the pleasant labors of compiling this work I have been assisted by
one of the brightest stars in the galaxy of brilliant meteors in the
Masonic Firmament, to whom I heartily tender my grateful
acknowledgements; hoping that the advantages anticipated may be fully
realized by my brethren.

In my effort to pull the Mask off of the Clandestine, self constituted
Organization of Freemasonry Among Colored Men in the state of
Massachusetts, under the supervision and control of the self
styled--Illegitimate Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts, And also
the early introduction and the irregularity of Clandestine and Bogus
Freemasonry in the State of Texas among Colored Men; I respectfully
submit and dedicate the results of my efforts of this work to the Ill.
John G. Jones, 33 deg. M. P. Sovereign Grand Commander of the United Supreme
Council of A. A. S. Rites of the Southern and Western Masonic
Jurisdiction of the United States, its Territories and Dependencies, and
Imperial Grand Potentate of the Imperial Grand Council of the Ancient
Arabic Order of Nobles of the Mystic Shrine of North and South America,
also Grand Master of Masons of the State of Illinois.

    C. L. Mitchell, 33 deg., Grand Master,
      M. W. King Solomon Grand Lodge,
        A. F. & A. M. of Texas and Masonic Jurisdiction.

San Antonio, Texas.




[Illustration

    C. L. MITCHELL, 33 deg.
    M. W. Grand Master
    M. W. King Solomon Grand Lodge
    A. F. & A. M. Jurisdiction of Texas.

    Grand Auditor General, H. E.
    United Supreme Council, A. A. S. R.
    for the
    S. and W. Masonic Jurisdiction U. S. A.
    Grand Deputy of the Imperial Grand Council
    for the
    Ancient Arabic Order of Nobles of the Mystic Shrine
    For North and South America
    Grand Register General of the Order of the Red Cross
    of Constantine]




ORIGIN AND HISTORY OF BOGUS FREEMASONRY AMONG COLORED MEN

In the United States of America and Texas, From its Earliest
Introduction


                                          San Antonio, Texas Dec 1, 1908

In order that the members of the Masonic Fraternity may have a correct
and thorough understanding about the origin and the irregularity of
Freemasonry among Colored men in the state of Texas, it will be
necessary to state the time and place that clandestine and spurious
Freemasonry among Colored Men was instituted in the state of
Massachusetts and also the establishing of that self constituted African
Grand Lodge of Modern Masons of Massachusetts which is now the Prince
Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts for it was from that corrupt,
notorious, bogus Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts whose record
covers the very blackest page in masonic history that Freemasonry among
Colored Men in the state of Texas first originated from. I am fully
aware of the fact that when the truth is told about the actions and
conduct of the leaders of the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts
which has been done from time to time their minds are inflamed to an
extra ordinary degree of madness, hatred and dislike and they talk and
write and say anything except the truth, and the truth they will never
state except it is by accident on one hand and mistake on the other.




FREEMASONRY AMONG COLORED MEN IN MASSACHUSETTS

March 6, 1775


1st question. Who were the Colored Men in the state of Massachusetts
that have advertised themselves and who claimed to have been made Master
Masons in a White Masonic Lodge in the state of Massachusetts. Can you
state the time and place and under what circumstances they have asserted
that it occurred?

1st Answer. The Colored Men in the state of Massachusetts that have been
advertised of having been made Master Masons, were Prince Hall, Boston
Smith, Thomas Sanderson and two or three others. They have said and have
tried to make someone believe that they were made Master Masons in a
White Masonic Lodge that was called a Traveling Masonic Lodge and that
it was connected with General Gages Military Regiment at Boston
Massachusetts on the 6th of March 1775 and that this White Masonic Lodge
in General Gages Military Regiment, they said, held a charter from the
Grand Lodge of England, and replying to that unwarranted statement made
and published by the leaders of the spurious Prince Hall Grand Lodge of
Massachusetts, for the Grand Lodge of England has repeatedly said that
they did not have any masonic lodge in General Gages Military Regiment
when that regiment was in the United States and the question has time
after time been asked the members of the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of
Massachusetts and particularly those in Massachusetts that claim to know
so much about it to give the name and the number of that masonic lodge
that Prince Hall, Boston Smith and Thomas Sanderson was made master
masons in that was connected with General Gages Military Regiment which
was then in the United States, and these wily fellows and Masonic
intervators have never been able to give us any information as to what
the name or even the number of this Masonic Lodge that they say was in
General Gages Military Regiment. And inasmuch as no person has ever been
found that could furnish any genuine information about this matter there
is no doubt but the statements that have been paraded around the country
about this matter were bare-faced, willful and malicious falsehoods, and
in the absence of any proof to confirm their statements it is very safe
to say that Prince Hall, Boston Smith, Thomas Sanderson and their
associates simply went to bed at night and dreamed that they had been
made Master Masons and got up next morning with their minds in a high
state of hallucination and really thought it was so, when as a matter of
fact there was nothing, nothing in it, and they simply drew on their
imaginations.

2nd question. What was the name of the first lodge of Colored Men who
belonged to the Masonic fraternity in the state of Mass.?

2nd Answer. The name of the first Colored Lodge of Masons in the state
of Massachusetts was a lodge named African Lodge No. 459.

3rd question. When was the first Grand Lodge of Colored Masons organized
in the state of Mass.?

3rd Answer. The name of the first Grand Lodge of Colored Masons that was
organized in the state of Mass. was a Grand Lodge that was designated as
African Grand Lodge of Modern Masons of Mass.

4th question. How many lodges took part in the organization of African
Grand Lodge of Modern Masons that was organized at Boston Mass. on the
24th of June 1791?

4th Answer. There was only one lodge that took part in the organization
of African Grand Lodge of Masons of Mass. on the 24th of June 1791 at
Boston Mass. when the Masonic law and landmarks of Freemasonry have said
that in order to organize a regular Grand Lodge it requires not less
than three warranted lodges, that has been the Masonic law both in this
country and in Europe and has been followed and strictly adhered to by
every well regulated and lawful Masonic Grand Lodge since the year of
1717 down to the present day and not otherwise.

5th question. What is meant by the words F. & A. M.?

5th Answer. Free and Accepted Mason the words and title of Free and
Accepted Mason is an innovation in Masonry and was adopted by Masons who
did not wish to follow the early established custom rules and principles
of the Masonic fraternity.

6th question. What is meant by the words and title A. F. & A. M.?

6th Answer. The words A. F. & A. M. means Ancient Free and Accepted
Masons which words and title are of ancient origin and should be used
and adopted by every well regulated Masonic subordinate lodge and Grand
Lodge in this country. For it is in keeping with the early ancient
Masonic laws rules and regulations of the Masonic fraternity.

7th question. What is meant by the words and title of states rights,
masons as you so often hear in the state of Texas by the masons who
belong to the so-called Grand Lodge of Texas that J. W. McKinney is the
Grand Master of and also the so-called Grand Lodge of the State of New
York that one individual who goes by the name of Henry A. Spencer who
advertises himself as being the Grand Master of the so-called Grand
Lodge of Colored Masons of the state of New York which is a self
constituted and bogus grand body?

7th Answer. The best application and definition that can be given to
those masons who call themselves state right masons is that they are no
masons at all. For if a man is a legal and genuine mason he is a mason
all over the world, and is to be recognized as a mason in every land and
in every country, but the masons in the state of Texas that belong to
the McKinney Grand Lodge in Texas and the self constituted Grand Lodge
in the state of New York that Henry A. Spencer is at the head of they
are not recognized all over the world and these being state institutions
and the masons who belong in Texas and of New York are not recognized as
legitimate masons in any part of the world.

8th question. What is meant by the numbers of 3, 5 and 7?

8th Answer. The fundamental numbers in Freemasonry are 3, 5 and 7, and
of these, by far the most essential is the number 3. The three principal
columns are Wisdom, Strength and Beauty, and a lodge is supported by
them.

The number "three" derived its significance in the early period of
antiquity, and back in the ages of the earliest centuries, no court of
law was legally organized unless three judges were present, and these
tribunals perpetuated ancient temples worshipped frequently, if not
invariably convened, under trees, in imitation of the Scandinavian ash.

Seven threes were prescribed as the highest number. The judges were
absolutely required to open and regularly hold a court of justice. The
maximum was seven, and in some cases five were demanded to proceed in
due form to adjudicate upon the matter brought before them. These
practices in early days present a solution of the Masonic landmark that
three or more members are necessary to open or close a Masonic lodge.

9th question. What is meant by the word and title of A. F. & A. Y.
Masons?

9th Answer. A. F. & A. Y. Masons means Ancient, Free and Accepted York
Masons, the city of York is in the north part of England it is
celebrated for its traditional connection with Freemasonry in England.
The first charter granted in England to the Masons as a body was by
authority and power of King Athelstan, in the year of 926 at York,
England and the application was made by Prince Edwin and Prince Edwin
summoned all the Masons in England to meet him in congregation at the
City of York, England and from this assemblage of Masons at York the
letter "Y" originated. Prince Edwin was elected Grand Master of the
Grand Lodge that was organized at York England in 926. From the
commencement of 926 of the assembly of Masons at York the letter "Y"
commenced, and has been known among members of the Masonic fraternity
and at the establishing of the Grand Lodge at York, England in the year
926 they adopted a constitution and general regulation for the craft.

Prince Edwin, the brother of King Athelstan of England was an eminent
and distinguished Mason and King Athelstan was the grandson of King
Alfred the first anointed King of England who translated the Holy Bible
into the Saxon language.

The Grand Lodge that was established in York, England in 926 prospered
and flourished. The City of York, England was the seat of Masonic
government of the craft in England.




THE MASK STRIPPED OFF OF THE CLANDESTINE SPURIOUS AND UNLAWFUL SELF
CONSTITUTED ORGANIZATION OF FREEMASONRY

Among Colored Men in the State of Massachusetts Under the Supervision
and Control of the Self Styled Illegitimate Prince Hall Grand Lodge of
Massachusetts Dissected and Exposed and is now in the Limelight of Day.


The self styled Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Mass. and the Grand Lodges
among Colored Masons that recognized them and affiliated with them have
time after time published in their printed proceedings to the Masonic
world that Freemasonry among Colored Men in the state of Mass. commenced
at the time when Prince Hall, Boston Smith, Thomas Sanderson and their
associates were made master masons that it was in a white lodge and that
this White Masonic Lodge was connected with General Gages Military
Regiment, and that this Military Regiment was at Boston Mass. March the
6th 1775 and the Masonic Lodge that was claimed to be connected with
General Gages Military Regiment holds its charter of power and authority
from the Grand Lodge of England and they positively state in language
that it is so plain that it cannot be misunderstood that Prince Hall,
Boston Smith, Thomas Sanderson and their followers was made Master
Masons on the 6th of March 1775 at Boston Mass. if any person has any
doubt about the matter read the printed Masonic proceedings of the
Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Mass. of 1875, 1876 and 1877 and the year of
1903 and 1904. See the History of Freemasonry among Colored Men in the
State of Mass. by the late Louis Hayden past Grand Master of the Prince
Hall Grand Lodge of Mass. See the Grand Lodge proceedings of Illinois
for the year of 1873, 1874 and 1875. See the Grand Lodge proceedings of
Pennsylvania of 1865, 1872, and 1876. See the historical facts of
Freemasonry among Colored Men in the United States published by J. M.
Conna of Connecticut in the year of 1876. See the history of Freemasonry
among Colored Men in the United States by W. H. Grimshaw of Washington
D. C. 1903. These and many other Grand Lodges make the same statement.

Now to show you that these ignoramuses and peddlers of Masonic falsehood
did not even know or have the slightest conception of what they were
talking about. They hastened to put their ignorant and prejudice
imagination and conclusions into print which has been the cause and the
means of bringing confusion among the craft.

The records of the War department of the English Government show that
General Gages Military Regiment was not in the United States of America
and located at Boston Mass. in the year of 1772-1773 and in the middle
part of the year of 1774. It appears from the record of the English War
department that General Gages Military Regiment which was stationed at
Boston Mass. was in the middle part of 1774 recalled to England and did
not return back to the United States again. And a number of voluminous
articles has on several occasions appeared in numerous American
magazines by some of our American Military Generals relative to the
occupation of British soldiers on American soil in the year of 1774,
1775, 1776 and you will find that they do not mention or refer to the
name of General Gages Military Regiment being present in Boston Mass. in
the year 1775 at Boston Mass. but they do refer to General Gages
Military Regiment being in the United States at Boston in the year of
1772 and 1773 and the middle part of the year of 1774 and having been
recalled by the English government. In the National Magazine of the
month of June 1907 an article there appeared in that magazine relative
to the withdrawal by the English War Department of General Gages
Regiment from Massachusetts in the year of 1774.

And upon further investigation of this matter we find that General Gages
Military Regiment which Prince Hall, Boston Smith, Thomas Sanderson and
their associates claim to have been made Master Masons on the 6th of
March 1775 at Boston Mass. that General Gages Regiment was not in the
United States at that time. This was published by a circular issued by
James Barnett Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of New York. See the
proceedings of the organization of the second Grand Lodge of Colored
Masons Of the state of New York James Barnett in the year of 1848. See
the circular letter of Jacob Francis Grand Secretary of the Grand Lodge
of New York on Oct. 25th 1848, and they state the same thing that
General Gages Military Regiment was not in the United States of America
March the 6th 1775 and that being true how can it be possible that
Prince Hall, Boston Smith, Thomas Sanderson and their associates could
have been made Master Masons in a Lodge in General Gages Military
Regiment on the 6th of March 1775 at Boston Mass. when General Gages
Military Regiment was not in the United States of America. It shows
conclusively that the introduction of Freemasonry in the State of Mass.
among Colored Men was not only unlawful and a fraud and sham, but that
the statements coming from those individuals from the State of Mass. was
untruthful and unreliable and they simply told beyond all peradventure
of a doubt, a bare-faced, wilful and malicious lie, and which had been
manufactured for the very purpose of misleading and hoodwinking the
Colored People of this country.

I am satisfied that the claim put forth by the members of the spurious
Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Mass. that Prince Hall and his associates
claiming that they were made Master Masons in a Lodge in General Gages
Military Regiment on March the 6th 1775 at Boston Mass. is a falsehood
and a complete misrepresentation from beginning to end for there is not
a particle of genuine documentary evidence that has ever been presented
to sustain or reply upon anything that the followers and Members of the
Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Mass. has ever said or written.


AFRICAN GRAND LODGE OF MODERN MASONS OF MASSACHUSETTS ORGANIZED WITH
ONLY ONE LODGE ON THE 24TH OF JUNE 1791 AT BOSTON MASS.

The first Grand Lodge of Colored Masons in the State of Mass. was named
African Grand Lodge of Modern Masons of Mass. and it was organized with
only one Lodge and the name of that Lodge was African Lodge No. 459 this
occurred on the 24th of June 1791 at Boston Mass. See the circular of
the proceedings of the organization of African Grand Lodge of Modern
Mason of Mass. organized June the 24th 1791 at Boston Mass. and signed
by Prince Hall Grand Master and Prince Taylor Grand Secretary of the
African Grand Lodge of Modern Masons of Mass. See the printed
proceedings of the Grand Lodge of Illinois in 1867. See the printed
proceedings of the Grand Lodge of Iowa when it was organized in the year
of 1881 when John Page was elected Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of
Colored Masons of the State of Iowa in 1881.

See the circular and the Masonic proceedings issued by J. H. Hall Grand
Secretary of the Grand Lodge of New Jersey in the year of 1873. See the
proceedings of the Grand Lodge of Tennessee when Nelson McGavoc was
Grand Master and Abraham Smith was Grand Secretary in the year of 1874.
See the circular issued by the Grand Lodge of New York in 1874 when W.
C. H. Curtis was Grand Master, and Albert Woodson was Grand Secretary.
See the printed proceedings of the various sessions of the Grand Lodge
of Mass. See the history of Freemasonry in the United States among
Colored Men by J. N. Conna of Connecticut together with the Published
statements of a number of other Grand Lodges and they all emphatically
state and agree in language that is not uncertain, that the first Grand
Lodge of Colored Masons organized in the State of Mass. was African
Grand Lodge of Modern Masons which was organized with only one Lodge and
that was on the 24th day of June 1791 at Boston Mass.

There cannot be any doubt by any Masonic scholar or student in this day
or time nor there can be any uncertainty in the manner by the officers
and members of any well regulated and lawful Grand Lodge of Freemasonry
in the whole world, but that the establishing of African Grand Lodge of
Modern Masons of Mass. on the 24th of June 1791 with only one Lodge but
that it is a clandestine spurious and irregular body for it has been
since the year of 1717 that well established Masonic law of Freemasonry
that it requires not less that three warranted Lodges to organize a
regular Grand Lodge. The Masonic authorities on that proposition both in
this country and Europe are uninformed and no Grand Lodge has ever been
recognized as being a legal Grand Lodge that has been organized with a
less number than three warranted lodges.


The Name of the African Grand Lodge of Massachusetts was Changed to the
Name of the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Mass. in 1808.

After the Death of Prince Hall which occurred in the year of 1807, at
the session held in the year of 1808 the name of African Grand Lodge of
Modern Masons of Massachusetts was changed to the name of Prince Hall
Grand Lodge of Modern Masons of Mass.

Judging from the rapid and numerous changes of position as soon as a
cloud appeared among the so-called bogus Masons and an spurious Grand
Lodge of Mass. some of the Masonic writers and followers and members of
the bogus Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Mass. when they where exposed and
shown up and dislodged from one untenable position they have jumped from
one position to another. On the 24th of June 1791 they called themselves
Modern Masons, in 1847 they called themselves Compact Masons, in 1880
they styled themselves as Free and Accepted Masons. We may expect at any
time to hear of those Masonic imposters and shams of Mass, belonging to
that notorious self constituted Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Mass. giving
themselves another title and name at any time.

    London England
    Freemasonry Hall
    Office of the Grand Sec.

                                           London England, May 10, 1874.

    To John G. Jones, Esq.,
    Grand Secretary,
    Dear Sir and Bro:--

    On the 27th of December of 1873 I addressed you a letter which I
    hope will reach you in due time giving you the information that you
    seek concerning a Lodge that was said to have belonged to the Grand
    Lodge of England in General Gages Military Regiment that was in the
    United States of America. As I stated to you in my former letter
    that there was no Masonic Lodge in General Gages Military Regiment
    in the United States and I beg to state to you and the brethren in
    your country as to a provincial Grand Master by the Grand Lodge of
    England. Any person having such papers claiming to be such is a
    fraud. I enclose you a copy of a letter that I addressed to Mr. B.
    F. Rogers of Springfield Ill., who is Grand Master of your State.

    I trust this will supply you with all the information that you
    desire.

        Yours Fraternally,
            John Hervey,
                Grand Sec'y.


    London England,
    Freemason Hall
    Office of the Grand Sec.

                                          London England, May 4th, 1875.

    Mr. B. F. Rogers,
    Grand Master of Masons of the State of Ill.

    My very Dear Sir and Bro:--

    Your letter was received. I take pleasure in stating to you that in
    the latter part of December 1873 I forwarded a letter to Bro. John
    G. Jones of Chicago who is Grand Secretary of your Grand Lodge in
    which I gave him the information that you now desire. I now beg to
    say to you that the Grand Lodge of England never had any Masonic
    Lodge in General Gages Military Regiment whose occupation was in the
    United States at the time that you mentioned nor has our Grand Lodge
    any record of any such appointment as Prince Hall to be Provincial
    Grand Master in the United States. If any such appointment is
    presented and claims to have been made by the Grand Lodge of England
    you are at liberty to deny it, and give the same information if you
    wish to the craft in the United States as we do not wish our Grand
    Lodge to be misrepresented.

        Yours fraternally,
            John Hervey,
                Grand Sec'y.


    Lawyer John G. Jones 33,
    Sov. Grand Commander,

                                          Paris, France, Nov. 4th. 1907.

    Illustrious Sir and Bro: Your letter reached me on yesterday and
    many thanks. You will kindly remember me to all brethren in Chicago.
    I like America better than I do this country, or the places that I
    have been in since I left Chicago probably that is owing to the fact
    that having been born and reared in Chicago I feel more at home. But
    the French people, and particularly those that are members of
    Masonic fraternity, are very pleasant and kind. I visited one Lodge
    last night and last week I visited the consistory of the Ancient
    Accepted Scottish Rite. Before you are admitted in any of the
    Masonic bodies, here you are required to stand a very rigid
    examination, you know about what that is. There is no prejudice in
    this section of the country against man because he may be of a dark
    complexion, in all of my travels the Masonic body of which you are
    the head of in America among colored Masons is the only one that is
    known and recognized in this part of the country where I have been.
    We will go to London, England, next week. I will write you when I
    get there.

        Yours Fraternally, H. S. COLLINS, 33,


        London, England, Nov. 28th. 1907.
    Illustrious John G. Jones, 33,
        Grand Master of Masons of Illinois.

    Very Dear Brother--We arrived here last week and will remain here
    probably for a month. Will you kindly see Bro. Geo. Standwood, the
    Secretary of Chicago Lodge No. 5, and pay him my dues to the Lodge?
    We will be in Chicago the latter part of February, 1908. I have much
    to tell you when I get home. I visited the Masonic Lodges since I
    have been here and was treated with the utmost courtesy. The diploma
    from my Lodge and Consistory that you signed has been a great
    service and benefit to me. I hear your name quite highly spoken of
    by the members of the Masonic Fraternity this side of the Atlantic
    ocean. The Lodges and Masons that you are connected with in America
    among colored Masons are the only ones that are recognized over
    here.

        Yours Fraternally, H. S. COLLINS, 33.


CAN ONE MASONIC LODGE ASSUME THE FUNCTION OF A GRAND LODGE?

Some one might ask the question can only one lodge assume the functions
of a Grand Lodge? The answer to that must be emphatically No, and
whatever Lodge assumes the functions of a Grand Lodge then such Grand
Lodge is unlawful and irregular. See Mackey's Masonic Jurisprudence, see
Mitchell's Authority on Masonic Law, see Chase and Preston on Masonic
Law and they all agree that one Lodge cannot assume the function of a
Grand Lodge.


BOGUS PRINCE HALL GRAND LODGE OF MASSACHUSETTS NEVER HAS BEEN HEALED.

In order to place the matter before the Masonic fraternity some one
might inquire and ask the question that since the time that African
Grand Lodge of Modern Masons of Massachusetts was organized with only
one Lodge. On the 24th of June. 1791, which is now the Prince Hall Grand
Lodge of Massachusetts have they ever been healed and legally
Masonically set right? The answer to that is that they have not and only
a short time ago they admitted by saying that they had never been
healed, and Masonically set right, and that being true they were
established in an unlawful manner and are clandestine and irregular
Masons to this very day, and I challenge them to present any proof to
the contrary.


CAN A SUBORDINATE LODGE GRANT A LICENSE OR CHARTER TO ORGANIZE ANOTHER
LODGE? THEY CANNOT.

In order to justify the irregular and unlawful Masonic work that has
been done in the State of Massachusetts by the Colored men who belong to
the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts they attempt to justify
their actions by saying that it was legal and lawful for African Lodge
No. 459 to grant a license or charter to organize another Lodge and they
have published in a circular of two cases of that kind that occurred in
the year 1625. I have taken particular pains to thoroughly investigate
the cases that they referred to and no such actions of that kind was
ever done by any Masonic Lodge in the places that they referred to. All
the Masonic authorities, both in this country and Europe, have made it
plain how a Masonic Lodge could be organized and it must be done by the
authority of a Grand Lodge. No intelligent Mason and no genuine and
regular Mason, either Black or White, in the whole world, can find any
authority or precedent where one Subordinate Lodge can grant a charter
to another Subordinate Lodge.


    The Following Excerpt of a Letter From Ill. John G. Jones, of
    Chicago, Ill., Relative to Law Suit Pending in the District of
    Columbia Between the Old Compact Grand Lodge of the District of
    Columbia and the Legitimate Grand Lodge A. F. & A. Masons of
    Which Bro. H. C. Scott is Grand Master Shows That the Question
    at Issue is Purely a Local Matter and Does Not in Any Way Affect
    Any Other Grand Lodges in This Country and Shows Conclusively
    That the Claims Made by W. H. Grimshaw Amount to Nothing.

                                        Chicago. Ill., Dec. 2, 1908.

        Bro. Charles L. Mitchell, 33, Grand Master.

        The law suit between the two Grand Lodges in the District of
        Columbia is as follows:

        The Grand Lodge of the District of Columbia that Bro. H. C.
        Scott is the Grand Master of, over two years ago commenced a
        law suit against the old Compact Grand Lodge in the District
        of Columbia to prohibit them from using the word "ancient"
        the old Compact Grand Lodge in the District of Columbia
        filed a cross bill and saying that they were the first Grand
        Lodge in the District of Columbia to use the word "ancient"
        and Judge Wright of the Equity Court in giving his opinion
        rules and held that the old Compact Grand Lodge of the
        District of Columbia was entitled to use the word "ancient"
        and enjoined the Grand Lodge of the District of Columbia
        that Bro. H. C. Scott is the Grand Master of from using the
        word "ancient" and Bro. Scott and his Grand Lodge has
        appealed the case to the Court of Appeals in the District of
        Columbia where they can get justice in the matter. The law
        suit is a local matter between the two Grand Lodges In the
        District of Columbia which does not in the least or in any
        manner whatever affect any other Grand Lodge in this country
        and does not alter or affect the Masonic legal status of the
        Grand Lodge of the District of Columbia that Bro. H. C.
        Scott is the Grand Master of except using the word "ancient"
        of which I am satisfied that the higher court will reverse
        the decision of Judge Wright in the matter.




PRINCE HALL AND HIS ASSOCIATES MADE MASONS WITHOUT ANY CHARTER OR
AUTHORITY.

According to the statements made and published by the Prince Hall Grand
Lodge of Massachusetts, that from March the 16th, 1775 to 1787, that
African Lodge had no charter of any kind, and still in the face of all
of that we find that Prince Hall, Boston Smith, Thomas Sanderson of
Massachusetts, conferred the degrees of Free Masonry upon certain men
without any charter or without any authority whatever and still they
wish to call themselves regular Masons.


CLANDESTINE, SPURIOUS AND UNLAWFUL NATIONAL COMPACT GRAND LODGE OF
MASONS OF NORTH AMERICA THAT WAS ORGANIZED AT BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS, ON
THE 24th OF JUNE, 1847.

For many years past a great deal has been said and written about the
establishing of the Irregular and Illegitimate National Compact Grand
Lodge of Masons that was organized without a shadow of Masonic power and
authority in 1847 at Boston, Massachusetts and of all of the absurd and
ridiculous ideas which have ever incorporated itself in the minds of any
man who is a Mason there seems nothing so utterly weak and imbecile as
the doctrine that is advocated by the followers and adherents of that
Clandestine National Compact Grand Lodge which was founded upon
everything that was irregular and clandestine and predicated upon
fiction fables and falsehoods, these and nothing else.

The numerous statements that have been made and are being made now by
the exponents of the National Compact Grand Lodge purporting to be
genuine and historical, are solely unreliable and cunning inventions of
their own devised for the purpose of misleading the people.

On the 24th of June, 1847, at Boston, Mass., John T. Hilton, Grand
Master, Henry Harris, William Bruce, of the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of
Massachusetts, and James Bird, John G. Bias, James Richmond, of the
African Grand Lodge of North America, with its headquarters at
Philadelphia, Pa., and the Hiram Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania,
represented by James Newman, John Anderson, Samuel Brackles, Phillip
Buckhammond and several others from the Hiram Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania, and from the Boyer Grand Lodge of New York was William H.
Clark, Lewis Hayden, Alexander Elston, together with several others, met
in Boston, Mass., and organized the National Compact Grand Lodge of
North America. They elected John T. Hilton, of Boston, Mass., National
Grand Master, and William E. Ambush was elected National Grand
Secretary. This National Compact Grand Lodge of North America has done
nothing but breed dissension among Colored Masons in the United States.

From its earliest period of existence down to the present date, and it
has never been recognized as a regular and legal Masonic Grand Body and
never will as long as intelligent men have their right senses about
them.


THE GRAND LODGE OF ENGLAND HAS NEVER RECOGNIZED THE PRINCE HALL GRAND
LODGE OF MASSACHUSETTS.

If it was true that the Grand Lodge of England granted a charter to
African Lodge No. 459 at Boston, Mass., on Sept. 29th, 1784, and this
same African Lodge organized the African Grand Lodge of Modern Masons of
Massachusetts on the 24th of June, 1791, which now is the Prince Hall
Grand Lodge of Massachusetts, what was the matter or cause and reason
that the Grand Lodge of England has failed and refused to recognize the
Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts?

It must be self apparent to every intelligent Mason that it shows and
proves conclusively that the Grand Lodge of England never did grant a
Charter to African Lodge No. 459 at Boston, Mass., as the leaders of the
Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts would try to have you believe.
Who in the world ever heard of a Grand Lodge granting a charter to a
Subordinate Lodge and then refusing to recognize the very Lodge that the
Grand Lodge granted them a charter? It is the most ridiculous and absurd
statement I ever beard of. It certainly shows that the Grand Lodge of
England never at all granted a charter to African Lodge No. 459. On the
29th of Sept., 1784, and the officers of the Grand Lodge of England say
that they did not and all the talk about a commission having been
granted to Prince Hall as a Provincial Grand Master in America by the
Grand Lodge of England stamps the whole thing from beginning to the end
as a manufactured statement, a fraud and a sham.


TWO WHITE MASONIC GRAND LODGES IN ENGLAND, ONE ORGANIZED IN 926 AND THE
OTHER ORGANIZED IN 1739.

The first Grand Lodge organized among the White Masons of England was
organized at the City of York, England, in the year of 926, and the
second White Grand Lodge of England was organized at London, England, in
the year of 1739. See Mackey's Encyclopedia of Masonry; see Mitchell's
History of Freemasonry; see the Voice of Freemasonry published in
Chicago in the month of June, 1867. The members that composed the second
White Grand Lodge of England when it was organized in 1739 was made up
of expelled Masons from the first Grand Lodge of England that was
organized in the year of 926, and the second irregular and unlawful
Grand Lodge of England that was organized at London, England, in the
year of 1739 is the same Grand Lodge. R. Holt was Deputy Grand Master,
and William White was the Grand Secretary, and it was from this second
irregular and unlawful Grand Lodge of England that the African Lodge No.
459 claims that they secured their charter from.

In all fairness if the Grand Lodge of England granted a charter to
African Lodge No. 459 at Boston, Mass., it being a clandestine Grand
Lodge, it would follow beyond all dispute that African Lodge No. 459 at
Boston, Mass., was unlawful and clandestine Lodge. Although the Grand
Lodge of England has said they did not grant any charter to African
Lodge at Boston, Mass.


PRINCE HALL GRAND LODGE OF MASSACHUSETTS HAS NEVER PRESENTED OR SHOWED
THE CHARTER OF AFRICAN LODGE, TO ANY PERSON.

For many years the members of the Masonic fraternity have asked to see
the charter of African Lodge No. 459. That Prince Hall Grand Lodge
members of Massachusetts say that they had in their possession, and when
committees after committees have called and asked for to see it they
have been denied the opportunity and that one time they said in Boston,
Mass., to the committee that the charter had been destroyed by fire, and
another time they told the committee that they could not find the
charter. Don't you think and believe that if they had a charter for
African Lodge in Massachusetts that they would have that historical
Lodge on their roll in their printed proceedings? If you can find the
name of African Lodge in any of the Masonic printed proceedings of the
Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts it is more than any body else
can find. See and read the printed Masonic proceedings of the Prince
Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts, and see if you can find the name of
African Lodge printed there?


PRINCE HALL GRAND LODGE OF MASSACHUSETTS IS NOT RECOGNIZED BY THE GRAND
LODGE OF ENGLAND.

    Bro. John G. Jones, 33,
        Grand Master of Masons of Illinois,
                                          London, Eng., Dec. 20th, 1907.

    Dear Sir and Brother--We have remained here in London, England,
    longer than we intended to, and since writing to you I have made a
    visit to Dublin, Ireland. A large number of people in Dublin,
    Ireland, are doing fairly well, but from time to time there is a
    large number of people there leaving and going to United States. The
    other day I went to the Masonic headquarters here in London,
    England, to find out and investigate for myself if the Grand Lodge
    of England recognized the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts
    as I had always heard that our Masonry in America among Colored
    people came from Grand Lodge of England and the officials of the
    Grand Lodge of England who were very courteous to me took the
    occasion to inform me that the Grand Lodge of England does not
    recognize or affiliate with the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of
    Massachusetts. How is that Bro. Jones, that some of the Colored
    Masons keep saying in America that they got their charter from the
    Grand Lodge of England, when the Grand Lodge of England says that
    they do not recognize the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts,
    and it was at Boston, Mass., that the Colored Masons in
    Massachusetts have stated that they got a charter for a Lodge from
    the Grand Lodge of England?

    I want nothing more to do with any of the members that belong to the
    Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts. Our Colored brethren in
    United States should be informed about this matter.

        Yours Fraternally,      H. S. COLLINS, 33.


THIS IS WHAT MAKES THE PRINCE HALL GRAND LODGE OF MASSACHUSETTS SPURIOUS
AND CLANDESTINE.

1--Prince Hall, Boston Smith, Thomas Sanderson and their associates of
Boston, Mass., could not have been made Master Masons in a Lodge in
General Gages Military Regiment on the 6th day of March, 1775, at
Boston, Mass., for General Gages Military Regiment was not in the United
States at that time.

2--Prince Hall of Boston, Mass., never was appointed provincial Grand
Master in the United States by the Grand Lodge of England.

3--The Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts having connected itself
with the spurious National Compact Grand Lodge of North America in 1847
surrendered all of its rights if it had any as a Grand Lodge.

4--The White Masonic Grand Lodge of England that African Lodge No. 459
obtained a charter from was a clandestine and unlawful Grand Lodge of
Modern Masons in England.

5--The Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts styles themselves as
Modern Masons and Modern Masons are those Masons who refused to follow
and adhere to the ancient laws, rules and regulations and the landmarks
of Freemasonry. Those Modern Masons are Masonic innovators.

    JOHN G. JONES, 33.
        Grand Master of Masons of Illinois.


EXTRACTS FROM THE PROCEEDINGS AND SOME OF THE DECISIONS OF THE VARIOUS
MASONIC CONGRESSES AND NATIONAL MASONIC CONVENTION HELD AMONG THE
COLORED MASONS IN THE UNITED STATES SINCE AUGUST 11th, 1820.

                                           Chicago, Ill., April 8, 1908.

To All Whom This May Concern, Greeting:

The management of the International Masonic Bureau of Information of the
world wishes to state that we have devoted much time and labor in
collecting this much needed information which gives the time and place
as well as the decisions and also a brief account of the proceedings of
the various general Masonic congresses and National Masonic Convention
that has been held among the Colored Masons in the United States of
America since June 11th, 1820.


THE FIRST NATIONAL CONVENTION OF COLORED MASONS OF UNITED STATES HELD
JUNE 11th, 1820, AT PHILADELPHIA, PA.

A resolution was adopted recommending to the Grand Lodges that it was
unlawful and un-Masonic for any subordinate Lodge or Grand Lodge to
meddle with the degrees of Royal Arch Masons.

The convention after some other Masonic discussions adjourned.


SECOND NATIONAL CONVENTION OF COLORED MASONS IN THE UNITED STATES HELD
AT BOSTON, MASS., JUNE 24th, 1847.

John T. Hilton, Wm, A. Bruce, Henry Harris of the Prince Hall Grand
Lodge of Massachusetts, James Richmond, James Bird, Samuel Van Brackle,
Phillip Buchanan, John Anderson, James Powell of Pennsylvania, and
Alexander Elston, Wm. H. Clark of New York issued a call for National
Masonic Convention to meet in Boston, Mass., June the 24th, 1847, and it
was agreed and they did organize the National Compact Grand Lodge of
North America. John T. Hilton of Boston, Mass., was elected M. W. N.
Grand Master Wm. E. Ambush was elected National Grand Secretary. This
National Grand Lodge of North America adopted a constitution claiming
and exercising power and authority over every Grand Lodge of Masons in
each state in the United States and Canada.

This National Compact Grand Lodge in violation of all Masonic law
proceeded to issue charters to Grand Lodges in the United States which
was a Masonic law and rule that they adopted that was unheard of among
Masons of any nationality in any country or any land. This National
Compact Grand Lodge sowed the seed of discord and dissension among
Colored Masons in this country whose record has covered one of the
blackest pages in Masonic history. This National Compact Grand Lodge
continued to meet and elect officers for some years thereafter placing
heavy assessments upon subordinate Lodges and Grand Lodges throughout
the country.


THIRD NATIONAL CONVENTION OF COLORED MASONS HELD IN UNITED STATES WAS AT
NEW YORK CITY OCT. 12th, 1848.

James Barnett, Jacob Gibbs and several others of New York State called a
National Masonic Convention to meet in New York City, Oct. 12, 1848.
James Barnett was elected president of the convention.

Arnold Hicks offered a series of resolutions which was adopted bitterly
denouncing the National Compact Grand Lodge of North America that was
organized at Boston, Mass., June 24th, 1847. He claimed that the whole
National Compact Grand Lodge was a fraudulent and unlawful organization.

Chas. Hooten offered a resolution which was adopted that the
organization of African Grand Lodge of Modern Masons of Massachusetts,
June the 24th, 1791, at Boston, Mass., with only one Lodge that such
Grand Lodge was irregular and unlawful.

The Grand Lodge representative system was discussed and properly
outlined in the convention and each Grand Lodge was requested to follow
the same by an exchange of Grand representatives with each Grand Lodge.

A resolution was also adopted and the convention decided that the
Masonic law watch had been strictly adhered to by all regular Masons
that whenever a Grand Lodge for a State was organized that it required
not less than three warranted Lodges to assemble in a Masonic convention
for that purpose.


FOURTH NATIONAL CONVENTION OF COLORED MASONS OF UNITED STATES WAS HELD
AT LEAVENWORTH, KANSAS, JULY 10th, 1869.

Frank Caldwell offered a resolution to the effect which was adopted that
it is the sense of this convention that the establishing of Freemasonry
among Colored Masons in the United States at Boston, Mass., was
unauthorized and irregular and that the pretending of the organization
of African Grand Lodge of Modern Masons of Boston, Mass., June the 24th,
1791, was unwarranted and clandestine.


THE FIFTH GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF COLORED MASONS OF UNITED STATES WHICH
CONVENED IN CHICAGO, AUGUST 10th, 1872.

A resolution was offered by W. R. Lawton and adopted that a committee of
five (5) be appointed by the president of this congress to investigate
the correct origin and genuineness of Freemasonry among the Colored
Masons in the United States at Boston, Mass.

President W. C. H. Curtis appointed on the committee W. R. Lawton, of
Missouri, John G. Jones of Chicago, B. F. Rogers of Springfield, Ill.,
Jos. H. Banks of Providence, R. I., H. D. Vena of Detroit, Mich.

To the President and Members of the General Masonic Congress:

The undersigned committee that was appointed to investigate the origin
and the legal conditions of Freemasonry among our race in the State of
Massachusetts now submit their report. Your committee wishes to be
understood that we have taken considerable time in a thorough
examination of the matter and we have searched diligently to ascertain
the truth regardless of whom it may please or displease.

1--We find that the establishing of the African Grand Lodge of Modern
Masons in Massachusetts among the Colored men on June the 24th, 1791, at
Boston, Mass., that the whole work was irregular, unlawful and contrary
to Masonic law.

The names of the Grand officers that were elected at the organization of
this spurious and irregular African Grand Lodge of Modern Masons of
Massachusetts on June 24th, 1791, was as follows:

Prince Hall Grand Master, Nero Prince, Deputy Grand Master, Cyrus
Forbes, Grand Secretary, Peter Best, Grand Treasurer.

2--Your committee have investigated and made searching inquiry to find
who took part in the organization of the African Grand Lodge of Modern
Masons among the colored Masons at Boston, Mass., on June the 24th,
1791, and it appears from the records as well as the delegates from
Massachusetts who admit and confirm the same that there was only one
Lodge and that was African Lodge No. 459 that participated in the
organization of the African Grand Lodge of Modern Masons that was
organized June 24th, 1791, at Boston, Mass., such organization of the
Grand Lodge is in open violation of Masonic laws and we cannot indorse
or approve the same.

Your committee finds according to the statements of the delegates from
Massachusetts that since the time of the organization of the African
Grand Lodge of Modern Masons in the State of Massachusetts which
occurred June 24th, 1791, that no steps or effort had been made or
taken by the officers and members of the African Grand Lodge of Modern
Masons of Massachusetts to have said Grand Lodge Masonically legalized
and set right.

Your committee is wholly unable to find or secure any genuine
information that even a charter was ever granted by the Grand Lodge of
England for the establishing of African Lodge No. 459 at Boston, Mass.

Your committee has investigated various printed proceedings of the
African Grand Lodge of Massachusetts which name was changed in the year
of 1808 to the name of the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts, and
we cannot find the name of African Lodge No. 459 printed in any of the
Grand Lodge proceedings of Massachusetts.

Your committee is unable to find or be placed in the possession of any
genuine information that would lead the committee to believe that there
was ever a charter granted by the Grand Lodge of England to Prince Hall
and his associates at Boston, Mass.

Your committee finds further that the so-often repeated statement made
by some of the less informed brothers of our race that the color line
and prejudice had been the cause in the State of Massachusetts and other
places throughout the country and especially in the northern states in
the refusal of some of the White Grand Lodges of Masons in denying us
recognition was not based on account of color but it was predicated
solely upon the grounds that the origin of Freemasonry among the Colored
Masons in the State of Massachusetts was unlawful and irregular.

    Committee:
      JOHN G. JONES, of Illinois,
      W. R. LAWTON, of Missouri,
      B. F. ROGERS, of Illinois,
      H. D. VENA, of Michigan,
      J. H. BANKS, of Rhode Island.

The above named committee report was adopted forty-one to ten.


THE SIXTH NATIONAL GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF COLORED MASONS OF THE UNITED
STATES WAS HELD AT OMAHA, NEB., MAY THE 10th, 1874

The Sixth National General Assembly of Colored Masons of the United
States convened at Omaha, Neb., May the 10th., 1874. Delegates were
present from the States of Pennsylvania, Nebraska, Iowa, Illinois,
Michigan, Tennessee, Missouri, Colorado, New York and Kansas. John G.
Jones of Chicago was elected president of the congress. E. R. Overall of
Omaha, was elected secretary.

Wm. D. Mathews, Grand Master of King Solomon Grand Lodge, of Kansas,
applied for admission to the convention and was refused on the grounds
that his Grand Lodge was irregular and clandestine.


THE MOTHER OF ALL THE COMPACT AND STATE RITES IN THE UNITED STATES.

Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts Colored Masons, Spurious
Followers in New York State Come to Grief.

A case has been decided in the law court at Charlotte, New York State
that has created intense interest in the Masonic circles among Colored
Masons in several of the States last week, and the Colored Grand Lodge
of New York, which was first started some years ago by the Prince Hall
Grand Lodge of Massachusetts, met an overwhelming defeat and was routed
at every point. The Grand Lodge of the State of New York commenced a law
suit at Charlotte, N. Y., against several Masons representing the Hiram
Grand Lodge of Ancient Free and Accepted Masons of the State of
Pennsylvania to prevent them from organizing lodges in the State of New
York under the authority of the Hiram Grand Lodge of the State of
Pennsylvania. The case came up before Judge Laverty and was bitterly
contested, and after an argument of a whole day by counsel representing
both sides Judge Laverty rendered his decision that after investigating
the matter thoroughly that the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts
that was organized many years ago, was an illegal and irregular Grand
Body, and that the Grand Lodge in the State or New York having had
lodges established in New York State that organized lodges from the
Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts that established the Grand
Lodge of New York that it was an unlawful Grand Lodge, and that the
Hiram Grand Lodge of Colored Masons of the State of Pennsylvania was a
lawful and regular Grand Body. The Hiram Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania was
organized formerly of chartered lodges from the Grand Lodge of the
District of Columbia.

And the M. W. Grand Lodge A. F. and A. M. of the District of Columbia,
held her warrant of constitution, power and authority from the White
Grand Lodge Ancient Free and Accepted Masons of the Republic of Romania,
Germany.

This warrant was granted to Hon. H. C. Scott 33 degree G. M. in 1895, he
was the first and only Colored man in the United States of America to
ever receive a lawful and regular warrant from any White Grand Lodge of
Masons of foreign jurisdiction, and is now healing and setting
Masonically right the Colored Masons in the United States of America.

What have the so-called State Rites got to say about this verdict,
coming from the mouth of such an able jurist of the Empire State. Our
people have been and are being robbed out of thousands of dollars by
these bogus Masons in this and other States.

Done at Masonic headquarters this first day of December, 1908. San
Antonio, Texas.

Ninth Question--What is meant by the word and title of A. F. & A. Y.
Masons?

Ninth Answer--A. F. & A. Y. Masons means Ancient, Free and Accepted York
Masons, the city of York is in the north part of England, it is
celebrated for its traditional connection with Freemasonry in England.
The first charter granted in England to the Masons as a body was by
authority and power of King Athelstan, in the year of 926 at York,
England, and the application was made by Prince Edwin and Prince Edwin
summoned all the Masons in England to meet him in congregation at the
City of York, England, and from this assemblage of Masons at York the
letter "Y" originated. Prince Edward was elected Grand Master of the
Grand Lodge that was organized at York, England, in 926. From the
commencement of 926 of the assembly of Masons at York the letter "Y"
commenced, and has been known among members of the Masonic fraternity
and at the establishing of the Grand Lodge at York, England, in the year
926 they adopted a constitution and general regulation for the craft.

Prince Edwin, the brother of King Athelstan of England was an eminent
and distinguished Mason and King Athelstan was the grandson of King
Alfred the first anointed King of England who translated the Holy Bible
into the Saxon language.

The Grand Lodge that was established in York, England, in 926 prospered
and flourished. The City of York, England, was the seat of Masonic
government of the craft in England.


FREEMASONRY FIRST ORGANIZED IN THE STATE OF TEXAS ON APRIL THE 10th,
1873, AT AUSTIN, TEXAS.

Tenth Question--When was Freemasonry first established in the State of
Texas among Colored men? As there have been a great deal of controversy
about the matter, inasmuch as some person have fixed it one place and
some have fixed it another place, let us see who is right?

Tenth Answer--The first Lodge of Colored Masons organized in the State
of Texas was at Austin, Texas, April 10th, 1873, the name of the Lodge
was Mount Bonnell Lodge, it was instituted and chartered by the
notorious self-constituted clandestine King Solomon Grand Lodge of the
State of Kansas that Wm. D. Mathews was the Grand Master of, and all
Masonic students and all Masonic authors in the United States have said
time after time that the King Solomon Grand Lodge of Kansas was a bogus
Grand Lodge. Sometime after Mount Bonnell Lodge was organized at Austin,
Texas. A Lodge was organized at San Antonio, Texas, and Houston, Texas,
and Galveston, Texas, all these Lodges were established by the spurious
King Solomon Grand Lodge of Kansas. And it appears from the records and
a circular issued by the King Solomon Grand Lodge of Kansas that at the
time the convention was held to organize a Grand Lodge for the State of
Texas that the Lodge at San Antonio, Texas, and the lodge at Houston
Texas, was only working under a dispensation from the Grand Lodge of
Kansas, and only a few years ago I held a conversation myself with Wm.
D. Mathews, Grand Master of the King Solomon Grand Lodge of Kansas and
he stated to me that at the time the Grand Lodge of Texas was organized
that there was only one Lodge and that was Mount Bonnell Lodge at
Austin, Texas, that was in good Masonic standing and that Saint John's
Lodge at Galveston, Texas, and the Lodge at San Antonio, Texas, and the
Lodge at Houston, Texas had been suspended by the Grand Lodge of Kansas
for un-Masonic conduct and that the dispensation to three of these
Lodges had been revoked by him as Grand Master of the King Solomon Grand
Lodge of State of Kansas and in support of that the King Solomon Grand
Lodge of Kansas refused to recognize and hold any Masonic intercourse or
affiliation with the Grand Lodge of Texas. That matter came up and was
discussed at the National Masonic Convention held in the city of
Chicago, Sept. 4th, 5th, 6th, 1877.

Eleventh Question--When was the Grand Lodge of Texas organized?

Eleventh Answer--A convention of delegates for the purpose of arranging
to organize a Grand Lodge of Texas was held at Brenham, Texas, Aug.
19th, 1874, and after some considerable discussion the convention
adjourned to meet at Houston, Texas, Jan. 19th, 1875, at Houston, Texas,
the so-called Grand Lodge of Texas was organized Jan. 19th, 1875, N. W.
Cuney was elected Grand Master and J. J. Hamilton was elected Grand
Secretary so it will be seen that Freemasonry in the State of Texas was
established in a clandestine manner by the compact King Solomon Grand
Lodge of Kansas.

Twelfth Question--Did the Grand Lodge of Texas work under the National
Compact Grand Lodge of North America and affiliate with it?

Twelfth Answer--It appears from the records that the so-called Grand
Lodge of the State of Texas took out a charter and worked under the
bogus National Compact Grand Lodge of North America and affiliated with
it and this same Grand Lodge of Texas now affiliates and recognizes such
bogus Grand Lodges as the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts, and
the notorious Compact Grand Lodge of Illinois whose records for
irregularity and spurious Masonic work have no equal in any part of the
world.

Thirteenth Question--Has the so-called Grand Lodge of Texas that J. W.
McKinney is the Grand Master of since it was instituted in an unlawful
and irregular manner, has it ever been Masonically legalized by any
Grand Lodge of Masons in the whole world, if so let them state what
Grand Lodge it was, when it was, and where at, that question has been
propounded to them time after time and they have refused to answer it
and in as much as they have refused to answer it, it must be taken and
accepted as being unlawful and a bogus Grand Lodge let me have your
opinion about the matter?

Thirteenth Answer--I have called upon the leaders of the so-called Grand
Lodge of the State of Texas that is managed and controlled by J. W.
McKinney and his followers in the State of Texas to name the time and
place if they could, if their Grand Lodge was ever Masonically legalized
and set Masonically right by any legitimate Grand Lodge in the world.
And they have failed and refused to give the name, time or place when
the Masonic Grand Lodge of Texas was ever Masonically legalized by any
legitimate Grand Lodge in the country and they have failed to do that,
they are certainly designated as an unlawful and clandestine Compact
Grand Lodge. They were established in an irregular manner and are
unlawful and bogus from their inception down to the present day and the
most of the leaders of the Compact Grand Lodge in the State of Texas are
the largest falsifiers, and liars and Masonic innovators that have ever
held their hands up toward heaven and as for the truth, for any
statement that they might make I would just as soon believe one of them
over a spelling book as a Bible.

[Illustration:

    J. F. Van Duzor, 33 deg.
    Grand Secretary
    M. W. King Solomon Grand Lodge
    A. F. & A. M. Jurisdiction of Texas.]


KING SOLOMON GRAND LODGE OF KANSAS ORGANIZED JUNE 24th, 1867.

Fourteenth Question--When was the King Solomon Grand Lodge of Kansas
that Wm. D. Mathews was Grand Master, when was it organized in the State
of Kansas, and whereat, and did this King Solomon Grand Lodge in Kansas
take out a charter and work under the National Compact Grand Lodge of
North America, give me all the facts and information that you have at
hand relative to that matter?

Fourteenth Answer--When the King Solomon Grand Lodge of Kansas was
organized June 24th, 1867, at Leavenworth, Kansas, it was accepted and
stated by most every Colored Mason in the United States that knew
anything about the matter that this King Solomon Grand Lodge of Kansas
was organized and proclaimed to be a Grand Lodge by Wm. D. Mathews and
his followers in the State of Kansas with only one Lodge and nobody
knows whether or not even that Lodge was a chartered Lodge. It was said
however that this one Masonic Lodge that proclaimed itself and organized
the King Solomon Grand Lodge of Kansas that it secured a charter from
the Compact Grand Lodge of the State of New York and at the time the
King Solomon Grand Lodge of Kansas was organized with only one
subordinate Lodge composed of a membership of eleven members. June 24th,
1867, at Leavenworth, Kansas, it took out a warrant of authority from
the National Compact Grand Lodge of North America that was organized in
the State of Massachusetts on the 24th day of June, 1847, for it must be
admitted by all well informed Masons that Massachusetts was the hotbed
and the Masonic factory where all kinds of Masonic degrees were
manufactured and all sorts and kinds of Masonic Lodges and Grand Lodges
and a spurious National Grand Lodge of North America was organized to
suit the time and conveniences of those that wished to secure and gain
high sounding Masonic titles regardless as to whether it was right or
wrong. If you have any doubt about the matter I herewith present a copy
of the warrant that was issued to the King Solomon Grand Lodge of Kansas
by that irregular and self-constituted National Compact Grand Lodge of
North America whose record has covered the very blackest page in Masonic
history among the colored Masons in this country.


THE WARRANT OF THE MOST WORSHIPFUL KING SOLOMON GRAND LODGE FOR THE
STATE OF KANSAS.

To all whom it may concern:

The Most Worshipful National Grand Lodge of the Most Ancient and
honorable fraternity of Free and Accepted Ancient York Masons of the
United States of North America, according to the old constitution at
York in the kingdom of England duly established and organized for the
said United States according to the resolutions and by the authority of
a Grand Convention held in the city of Boston, the State of
Massachusetts on the 24th, 25th, 26th and 28th day of June, A. D., 1847;
A. L. 5847.


WISDOM, STRENGTH, FRATERNITY.

Whereas, A petition bearing date, June 24th, A. D., 1867, was
represented and presented in the name of Wm. D. Mathews and others
praying the grant of a charter of Constitution and erection in the usual
form for holding a Grand Lodge in the State of Kansas under the name and
title of the Most Worshipful King Solomon Grand Lodge for the State of
Kansas and under the authority of the Most Worshipful National Grand
Lodge of the United States and North America, proposing the persons
after mentioned to be the first grand officers, viz: Wm. D. Mathews,
Leavenworth, Kansas, Grand Master, Geo. Edwards, Deputy Grand Master,
Samuel Jones, Senior Grand Warden, Henry Lee, Junior Grand Warden,
together with their associates which petition having been duly
considered, we are pleased to ordain a charter, to be issued in the
terms herein written.

Know Ye, therefore, That the Most Worshipful National Grand Master and
the National Grand Lodge of North America have constituted, erected and
appointed likewise, they hereby constitute, erect, and appoint the Grand
Master, Grand Wardens and brethren above named to be now and in all
times coming a true and regular Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted Masons
for the State of Kansas under the name, style and title of the Most
Worshipful King Solomon Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted Ancient York
Masons for the State of Kansas. And we do hereby authorize and empower
our Worshipful and beloved Brethren and their successors in office to
constitute by Charter, or organize by dispensation subordinate Lodges
within the State of Kansas and its jurisdiction, according to the
Constitution of Masonry and of the Most Worshipful National Grand Lodge
of North America, upon the payment of such fees as may be determined by
the said Most Worshipful Grand Lodge; also to make choice of a Grand
Master, Deputy Grand Master, Grand Wardens and other Grand Officers
annually to receive and collect funds for the support of the Most
Worshipful King Solomon Grand Lodge of Kansas, and for the payment of
such sums of money as may be assessed by the Constitution and
regulations of the Most Worshipful National Grand Lodge.

And we do further authorize and empower the said constituted brethren
and their successors to have and determined all and singular matters and
things relating to the craft within their jurisdiction with the
assistance of the members of the said Grand Lodge subject to an appeal
to the Most Worshipful National Grand Lodge of North America and shall
possess and exercise all the power and function of a State Grand Lodge
and we do hereby require the said constituted brethren to attend the
Most Worshipful National Grand Lodge of North America at their triennial
communication and other meetings by their Grand Master, Deputy Grand
Master and Grand Wardens, or by proxy regularly appointed; also to keep
a fair and regular record of your proceedings in a book to be kept for
that purpose and we do enjoin upon the officers and brethren of said
Grand Lodge that they be punctual in their payments of such sums of
money as may be assessed on them by the National Grand Lodge of North
America, and to make regular returns annually to the National Grand
Secretary or to the Most Worshipful National Grand Lodge of the names
and members of all the Lodges under the jurisdiction of said Grand Lodge
where located, of the suspensions, expulsions and the Charters
surrendered; also the number of members belonging to each Subordinate
Lodge and of the election and installation of the officers of the Grand
Lodge.

And we do hereby declare that the proceedings of said Grand Lodge in
National Grand Lodge to commence from the 24th day of June Anno Domini,
One Thousand Eight Hundred and Sixty-seven; and lastly do we hereby
authorize and empower our said Worshipful Brother Wm. D. Mathews and his
associates in office to install their successors being first duly
elected and chosen to whom they shall deliver this warrant and invest
them with all the power and dignities to their offices respectfully
belonging and such successors shall in like manner from time to time
install their successors, such installation to be upon or near St. John
the Evangelist or St. John the Baptist's day, during the continuance of
this Grand Lodge for ever provided always that the said above named
Worshipful Brothers and their successors pay due respect to the Most
Worshipful National Grand Lodge of North America, and the ordinance
thereof; otherwise this warrant to be of no force or virtue.

Given by the authority of the Most Worshipful Grand Lodge of North
America, under the signatures of the Most Worshipful National Grand
Officers and the Seal of the Most Worshipful National Grand Lodge of
North America, this 24th day of June Anno Domini, One Thousand Eight
Hundred and Sixty-seven.

    Richard Howell Gleaves, M. W. N. G. M.
    Jonathan Davis, M. W. N. G. S.


THE NATIONAL COMPACT GRAND LODGE OF NORTH AMERICA ORGANIZED AT BOSTON,
MASS., JUNE 24th, 1847.

Fifteenth Question--In as much as there has been considerable discussion
and controversy going on through the country for a number of years,
relative to when the National Compact Grand Lodge of North America was
organized and where at, and whether or not it was considered irregular
and unlawful or whether it was a legitimate body, those questions have
been asked for a number of years.

Fifteenth Answer--Mackey's Masonic jurisprudence and all of the Masonic
authors on Masonic law have laid down the well established rule that has
been recognized in the United States of America ever since Freemasonry
was first established in this country, that there cannot be any higher
or Supreme power than a Grand Lodge of a state. And the spurious
National Compact Grand Lodge of North America is an unauthorized and
clandestine body. It was organized in Boston, Mass., on the 24th of
June, 1847, it has been a disgrace and a burning shame and a slander
upon the Colored Masons of this country ever since it was first
organized. The National Compact Grand Lodge of North America that was
established at Boston, Mass., on the 24th of June, 1847, is a self
constituted, bogus, counterfeit grand body, and any Grand Lodge or
Subordinate Lodge in the United States of America that affiliates or
recognizes it is clandestine and bogus.

Sixteenth Question--When the Grand Lodge of Texas was organized at
Houston, Texas, Jan. 19th, 1875, that J. W. McKinney is now the Grand
Master of, did that Grand Lodge have a Charter from the Bogus National
Compact Grand Lodge of North America?

Sixteenth Answer--Yes they did, and looking over the records of the
National Grand Lodge of North America that was organized at Boston,
Mass., in 1847, which was a bogus concern. Here is a copy of the Charter
that was issued to the Grand Lodge of Texas in 1875 by the Spurious
National Compact Grand Lodge of North America.


THE WARRANT OF THE MOST WORSHIPFUL COMPACT GRAND LODGE OF FREE AND
ACCEPTED YORK MASONS FOR THE STATE OF TEXAS.

To All Whom It May Concern:

The Most Worshipful National Grand Lodge of the Most Ancient and
honorable fraternity of Free and Accepted Ancient York Masons of the
United States of North America, according to the old constitution at
York in the kingdom of England duly established and organized for the
said Convention held in the city of Boston, the State of Massachusetts
on the 24th, 25th, 26th and 28th day of June, A. D., 1847; A. L. 5847.

Whereas a petition bearing date Jan. 19th, 1875, was represented and
presented in the name of N. W. Cuney and others from the State of Texas
praying the grant of a Charter of Constitution in the usual form for
holding a Grand Lodge in the State of Texas under the name and title of
the Most Worshipful Compact Grand Lodge for the State of Texas, and
under the authority of the Most Worshipful Grand Lodge of the United
States and North America proposing the persons hereafter mentioned to be
the first Grand Master and the first Grand Secretary viz: N. W. Cuney of
Galveston, Texas Grand Master, J. J. Hamilton Grand Secretary together
with their associates which petition having been duly considered we are
pleased to ordain a Charter to be issued in the terms herein written.

Know Ye, therefore, that the Most Worshipful National Grand Master and
the National Grand Lodge of North America have constituted, erected and
appointed likewise, they do hereby constitute, erect and appoint the
Grand Master and Grand Wardens, and brethren to be now and in all times
coming a Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted York Masons for the State of
Texas, and we do hereby authorize and empower our worthy and beloved
brethren and their successors in office to constitute by charter or
organize Lodges within the State of Texas according to the constitution
of the Most Worshipful National Grand Lodge of North America duly
constituted on the 24th day of June, 1847, at Boston, Mass., and comply
with the rules and regulations and the payment of such sums of money as
be assessed by the Constitution and regulation of the Most Worshipful
National Grand Lodge of North America.

And we do further authorize and empower the said constituted brethren
and their successors to have and determined all and singular matters and
things relating to the craft within their jurisdiction with the
assistance of the members of the said Grand Lodge subject to an appeal
to the Most Worshipful National Grand Lodge of North America and shall
possess and exercise all the power and function of a State Grand Lodge
and we do hereby require the said constituted brethren to attend the
Most Worshipful National Grand Lodge of North America at their triennial
communication and other meetings by their Grand Master, Deputy Grand
Master and Grand Wardens or by proxy regularly appointed; also to keep a
fair and regular record of your proceedings in a book to be kept for
that purpose and we do enjoin upon the officers and brethren of said
Grand Lodge in the State of Texas that they be punctual in their
payments of such sums of money as may be assessed on them by this
National Compact Grand Lodge of North America and to make regular
returns annually to the National Grand Secretary or to the Most
Worshipful National Grand Lodge.

And we do hereby declare that the proceedings of said Grand Lodge in the
State of Texas by which brother N. W. Cuney is the Grand Master of to
commence from Jan. 19th, 1875, and we do hereby authorize and empower
our said Worshipful Brother N. W. Cuney of Galveston, Texas, and his
associates in office to install their successors first being duly
elected and chosen to whom they shall deliver this warrant and invest
them with all the powers and dignities to their offices respectfully
belonging and such successors shall like manner from time to time
install their successors, such installation to be upon or near the St.
John the Evangelist or St. John the Baptist's day during the continuance
of this Grand Lodge.

Given by the authority of the Most Worshipful National Grand Lodge of
North America under the signature of the Most Worshipful National Grand
Master of the Most Worshipful National Grand Lodge of North America this
19th day of Jan. 1875.

    Richard Howell Cleaves, M. W. N. G. M.

Seventeenth Question--Did you ever have any correspondence with Wm. D.
Mathews, Grand Master of the Compact Grand Lodge of the State of Kansas
relative to the organization of the so-called Grand Lodge of the State
of Texas that was organized Jan. 19th, 1875?

Seventeenth Answer--Yes, I had some correspondence with Wm. D. Mathews,
Grand Master of the King Solomon Grand Lodge of the State of Kansas
relative to the subordinate Lodges that took part in the organization of
the Grand Lodge of Texas, Jan. 19th, 1875. That was the time that the
Grand Lodge of Texas was organized when N. W. Cuney of Galveston, Texas,
was elected Grand Master.


                                       Leavenworth, Kan., Nov. 21, 1903.

    Mr. John G. Jones, 33,

    Grand Secretary of the M. W. St. Johns Grand Lodge of Illinois,

    Dear Sir and Bro--Your letter reached me last week at my home in
    Leavenworth, Kan., and in giving you the information that you desire
    the Lodge at Austin, Texas, was the first Lodge of Colored Masons
    organized among the Colored men in the State of Texas, it was on
    April 10th, 1873, it was chartered by the Most Worshipful King
    Solomon Grand Lodge of Kansas of which I have the honor of being its
    Grand Master. That was the only Lodge that was in good Masonic
    standing in our Grand Lodge when the Grand Lodge of the State of
    Texas was organized. The Lodge at San Antonio, Galveston, and
    Houston Texas was also chartered by our Grand Lodge of Kansas, but
    none of these last named three Lodges was in good and regular
    standing in our Grand Lodge. So you will notice that the Grand Lodge
    of Texas only had one warranted Lodge when it was established.

    Yours Fraternally,
        WM. D. MATHEWS, Grand Master.


REPORT ON THE ORIGIN AND THE IRREGULARITY OF FREEMASONRY AMONG COLORED
MEN IN THE STATE OF TEXAS AT THE NATIONAL MASONIC CONVENTION HELD IN
CHICAGO, SEPT., 4th, 1877.

To the President and Members of the National Masonic Convention now
Sitting in Chicago, Sept. 4th, 1877:

Your committee that was appointed to investigate the origin of
Freemasonry in the State of Texas beg leave to make the following
report:

We have carefully investigated the matter of the origin of Freemasonry
in the State of Texas and we find that it appears from the record that
Freemasonry was first established in the State of Texas by Wm. D.
Mathews, Grand Master of the King Solomon Grand Lodge of Compact Masons
for the State of Kansas which at the time the said King Solomon Grand
Lodge of Kansas was under and subordinate to the National Compact Grand
Lodge of North America.

We further find that the said Grand Lodge of Texas that C. C. Dean is
the Grand Master of that, the said Grand Lodge of Texas, when organized
January 19th, 1875, did not follow and comply with the landmarks and
laws of Freemasonry and that the said Grand Lodge of Texas is an
unlawful and irregular Grand Lodge and that the delegates from the Grand
Lodge of the State of Texas to this National Masonic Convention are not
entitled to seats in this National Masonic Convention,

    Fraternally Submitted,
      E. A. WILLIAMS, of Nebraska,
      H. D. VENA, of Michigan,
      J. H. BANKS, of Rhode Island, Committee.


FIRST REGULAR AND LEGAL GRAND LODGE OF COLORED MASONS IN UNITED STATES
AT WASHINGTON, D. C., 1895.

The first Grand Lodge of Colored Masons in the United States that was
healed and Masonically set right was the Grand Lodge of Colored Masons
of the District of Columbia which H. C. Scott is the Grand Master of. It
occurred in the year of 1895 by the duly accredited representatives from
the White Masonic Grand Lodge of Romania, Germany.


VARIOUS GRAND LODGE DECISIONS.

FIRST LEGAL GRAND LODGE OF COLORED MASONS IN THE STATE OF TEXAS, MARCH
19th, 1908.

The Most Worshipful St. Johns Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. M. Masons of the
State of Illinois established several Subordinate Lodges in the State of
Texas. A Masonic convention was held in the State of Texas by several of
the Subordinate Lodges in the State of Texas on March 19th, 1908, at San
Antonio, Texas, and the Most Worshipful King Solomon Grand Lodge of A.
F. & A. Masons for the State of Texas was organized. Bro. Chas. L.
Mitchell is Grand Master and Bro. J. F. VanDuzor is the Grand Secretary.

    Yours Fraternally,
        JOHN G. JONES, 33,
            Grand Master of Masons of the State of Illinois.


DECISIONS OF MASONIC GRAND LODGES.

1.--Since the Grand Lodge of the District of Columbia has been under the
supervision and control of the Past Grand Master Wm. H. Johnson and the
present Grand Master H. C. Scott of Washington, D. C., the Grand Lodge
has rendered some very important decisions which has been a guide for
many of the Grand Lodges for sometime in the past and will be a guide
and a landmark for many of the Grand Lodges in the future.

The Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts is Irregular and
clandestine, it was instituted with only one subordinate Lodge.

The Most Worshipful St. John's Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Masons of the
State of Illinois that Bro. John G. Jones is the Grand Master of was
lawfully and constitutionally established according to the landmarks and
laws of Freemasonry and is recognized by this Grand Lodge.

The Most Worshipful King Solomon Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Masons of the
State of Texas that Bro. Chas. L. Mitchell is Grand Master of has been
regularly and lawfully established and is recognized by this Grand
Lodge.

The Most Worshipful St. Andrew's Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Mason of the
State of Louisiana that Wm. T. Grant is the Grand Master of has been
regularly instituted according to the landmarks and laws of Freemasonry
and is recognized by this Grand Lodge.

The Most Worshipful German Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Masons of the State
of Alabama that Bro. J. H. McGehee is the Grand Master of has been
lawfully instituted and is recognized by this Grand Lodge.

The Most Worshipful Wm. T. Grant, Jr., Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Masons
of the State of Mississippi has been regularly organized and is
recognized by this Grand Lodge. Bro. J. R. Rawlins of Natchez, Miss., is
the Grand Master of.

The Most Worshipful Hiram Grand Lodge of A. F. A. Masons of the State of
Pennsylvania that Bro. C. R. France is the Grand Master of, has been
instituted in a regular and lawful manner and is recognized by this
Grand Lodge.

The Most Worshipful Grand Lodge of the State of Florida that Bro. E. E.
Franklin is the Grand Master of was regularly instituted and is
recognized by us.

We find the formation of the spurious Grand Lodge of Texas that J. W.
McKinney is the Grand Master of and W. M. McDonald is the Grand
Secretary of, was established in the most extraordinary irregular and
unlawful manner and is with the establishing of the bogus Prince Hall
Grand Lodge of Massachusetts which was only organized with one Lodge.

The so-called Grand Lodge in the State of Texas which is said to have
been instituted by K. R. Rogers of Austin, Texas, and is known as the
Hiram Tyram Grand Lodge is beyond all question or doubt the most
Clandestine and irregular Masonic Grand Lodge that has ever appeared
upon the Masonic stage of action. It is a Grand Lodge only on paper and
was instituted not in compliance with any of the landmarks or laws of
Freemasonry and is therefore counterfeit and Bogus and is not recognized
by this Grand Lodge.

This Grand Lodge has carefully examined into the origin of the Compact
Grand Lodge of Masons in the State of Illinois that H. E. Burris, of
Rock Island is the Grand Master, and the notorious R. E. Moore is the
Grand Secretary of, and we find it was instituted with only two
warranted Lodges and a Lodge under dispensation and from the records of
the Grand Lodge of Ohio one of the warranted Lodges that took part in
the convention was at that time not in good standing with the Grand
Lodge of Ohio. See records of the Grand Lodge of Ohio of 1865 and 1866.

Prince Hall of Massachusetts, a founder of a Spurious and Illegitimate
Masonry, among the Colored Masons in the United States, died at Boston,
Mass., in the year of 1807.


COLORED GRAND LODGE OF ALABAMA.

The Colored Masonic Grand Lodge of the State of Alabama which is named
the German Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Masons of the State of Alabama in
the year of 1906 at the annual session held at Montgomery, Ala., Bro.
J. H. McGehee, 33, Grand Master, and Bro. G. W. Hill, 32, Grand
Secretary, the Grand Lodge made the following decisions:

That the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts was organized with
only one Lodge which makes the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts
unlawful clandestine and irregular Grand Lodge.

It requires not less than three warranted Lodges to assemble in a
Masonic convention and organize a regular Grand Lodge for a State.

All Masons who are members of Compact Lodges are Bogus, Irregular and
Clandestine, and must not be recognized as Masons anywhere.

No compact Mason can be admitted in any subordinate Lodge in this State.


COLORED MASONIC LODGES OF COLORADO.

No Supreme Council of Ancient, Accepted Scottish Rite Masons possess any
right or power or authority to confer the degrees of entered apprentice
fellow-craft and Master Masons degree.

If a commandery of Knights Templars should confer the entered apprentice
fellow-craft and Master Mason's degree it is spurious and unlawful
Masonic work.


DECISIONS OF WHITE MASONIC GRAND LODGES. GRAND LODGE OF ARKANSAS.

The White Masonic Grand Lodge of the State of Arkansas at the annual
session held in 1838 and 1838 rendered the following decision:

This Grand Lodge will not recognize a Grand Lodge unless it has been
regularly organized by not less than three warranted Lodges.

GRAND LODGE OF CONNECTICUT.

The White Grand Lodge of Connecticut was organized July 8th, 1789, the
following is some of the decisions that the Grand Lodge of Connecticut
has rendered:

One Grand Lodge cannot issue a charter to organize another Grand Lodge.

The power and the authority to organize a Grand Lodge resides in the
three warranted Lodges that meet in a Masonic convention for that
purpose.

A regular Grand Lodge of Masons of a state is vested with power and
authority to go in another state and there organize subordinate Lodges
if the Grand Lodge in that state which has been already organized was
organized In an unlawful and irregular manner.

When a Grand Lodge of a state has been organized in an unlawful Masonic
way and manner it is then considered as no Grand Lodge at all and
another lawful and regular Grand Lodge has the authority and power to
invade such territories and there organize regular subordinate Lodges.

The White Masonic Grand Lodge of Alabama in the year of 1821 rendered
the following decisions at the session held at Montgomery, Alabama,
Thomas W. Farrar was Grand Master and Thomas A. Rogers was Grand
Secretary.

A Grand Lodge of a State cannot be regularly organized unless there is
not less than three regularly warranted Lodges.


WHITE MASONIC GRAND LODGE OF DELAWARE.

The Masonic Lodge of the State of Delaware since it was organized on
June the 6th, 1806, has rendered some very important decisions which has
been a guide for many of the Grand Lodges that have been organized since
that time.

The African Grand Lodge of Colored Masons in the State of Massachusetts
cannot be recognized not because they are Colored Masons but for the
reason that they were unlawfully instituted. They organized a Grand
Lodge with only one Lodge when they should have had not less than
three.

A regular Grand Lodge must be organized with not less than three
warranted Lodges.


THE LIGHT TURNED ON, ON BOGUS MASONRY IN TEXAS.

The record shows the first Lodges In Texas were organized by Capt. W. D.
Matthews, Grand Master of the King Solomon Compact Grand Lodge of
Kansas, on April 10, 1873, by organizing Mt. Bonnell Lodge No. 1,
Austin, No. 2, San Antonio and No. 3 Houston, No. 4 at Galveston. On the
19th of August, 1875, these four lodges met at Brenham, Texas, and
organized a Compact Grand Lodge with N. W. Cuney as the Grand Master,
and J. J. Hamilton as Grand Secretary.

Some years after, about 1885, (the record is not clear,) C. C. Dean
succeeded N. W. Cuney as Grand Master. Rev. A. Grant, W. D. G. M., and
in the year 1886 C. C. Dean, G. M.

Rev. A. Grant, W. D. G. M., called a special session of the Grand Lodge
and at that session declared and adopted the act of Secession from the
National Compact Grand Lodge, elected delegates to go to Houston, Texas,
as special commissioners to meet the Worshipful Grand Lodge of White
Masons for the purpose of being healed and chartered.

Now, according to the record found in Sayles' Masonic Jurisprudence, on
the History of Negro Masonry in Texas, emphatically states that these
Negro delegates did appear and did present to the White Grand Lodge a
petition to be healed and chartered.

Sayles does not give the names of the petitioners. The petition sets
forth that there were 650 members at that time, to be healed.

The record shows that the White Grand Lodge appointed a committee to
investigate the petition, and the record further shows that the
committee made the following report:

COMMITTEE REPORT ON NEGRO MASONRY IN TEXAS.

"We your committee find that these 650 so-called Negro Masons are not
Masons, and have no business with us nor about us, neither of us. If
Ephriam is joined to his Idols let him alone."

Now the record further shows that this Grand Lodge has sent delegates to
the General Masonic Congress on several occasions, and these delegates
were rejected. The first was in Sept. 4th and 5th, 1887, at Chicago. Mr.
Gillett of Kansas, offered the following resolution and it was
unanimously adopted:

"Whereas, The facts are before this convention that the Grand Lodge of
Texas, Colored, under C. C. Dean as Grand Master, was organized by
subordinate lodges instituted in the State of Texas by W. D. Matthews,
Grand Master of the Compact Grand Lodge of Kansas.

"Be it Resolved by this convention that the said Grand Lodge of Texas,
above mentioned, is hereby now declared by this convention to be an
unlawful and irregular Grand Lodge, and that this National Masonic
convention will now refuse and neither recognize or admit their
delegates in this convention."

And similar resolutions were adopted at the General Masonic Congress
that was held in Pittsburgh, Pa., July, 1904.


HOW THE MOST WORSHIPFUL KING SOLOMON GRAND LODGE, A. F. & A. M. WAS
ORGANIZED IN THE STATE OF TEXAS.

The origination of the M. W. King Solomon Grand Lodge, A. F. & A. Masons
which was organized March 19, A. D., 1908, and incorporated under the
laws of the State of Texas, March 27, A. D., 1908, of the following
Lodges, viz:

Mount Nebo Lodge No. 14, Galveston, Tex., Brackenridge Lodge No. 21,
Excelsior Lodge No. 25, San Antonio, Golden Jewel Lodge No. 23, Taylor;
Eureka Lodge No. 12, Hempstead.

These (5) five Lodges held their warrant of constitution from the M. W.
St. John Grand Lodge, A. F. & A. M. of the State of Illinois of which
the Hon. John G. Jones, 33rd degree, is Grand Master, and the M. W. St.
John Grand Lodge, A. F. & A. M. held her warrant of constitution from
the M. W. Grand Lodge A. F. & A. M., of Washington, District of
Columbia, of which Hon. H. C. Scott, 33rd degree is Grand Master. This
warrant was granted to Hon. H. C. Scott, 33rd degree Grand Master in the
year 1895. He was the first and only Colored Mason in the United States
of America to ever receive a lawful and regular warrant from any White
Grand Lodge of Masons of foreign jurisdiction, and he is now healing and
setting Masonically right the Colored Masons in the United States of
America.

According to Masonic law the only lawful and regular Grand Lodge of
Colored Masons in the State of Texas is the Most Worshipful King Solomon
Grand Lodge, A. F. & A. M., which was organized at San Antonio, Texas,
on 19th day of March, A. D., 1908 and lawfully incorporated under the
laws of the State of Texas on the 27th day of March, A. D., 1908, and it
is the only Colored Grand Lodge A. F. & A. M. in the State of Texas that
is recognized by foreign White Masonic jurisdiction of which C. L.
Mitchell, 33rd degree is Grand Master.

    In Reference to the Circular Matter Relative to One John A. Bell
    of Grand Rapids, Mich., Claiming to Hold a Warrant of Authority
    From the Grand Lodge of Liberia, I Beg Leave to Submit a Copy.
    The Original is Now in Possession of the Ill. Capt. W. T. Grant,
    M. W. Grandmaster of the M. W. St. Andrews Grand Lodge A. F. &
    A. M. of the State of Louisiana, and President of the
    International Bureau of Masonic Information of the World. Office
    331 Corondelet St., New Orleans, La.

                                           Masonic Hall,
                                               Monrovia, Liberia
                                                      Oct. 18, 1908.

    Bro. W. T. Grant,

        Grand Master of the M. W. St. Andrew Grand Lodge A. F. & A. M.
            State of Louisiana.

    Most Worshipful Brother: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of
    your favor of the 29th of August, inquiring if this Grand Lodge
    or the Grand Master has a Deputy in the person of John A. Bell
    at Grand Rapids, Michigan, and if any authority has been given
    him to open a lodge in America.

    In reply, I have to say that this Grand Lodge has no Deputy in
    the person of John A. Bell, nor has any warrant been given him
    authorising him to open any lodge in America or to do anything
    else. If he is doing anything Masonically whatsoever, he does it
    without the knowledge, consent and authority of this Grand
    Lodge.

        I beg to remain,
            Fraternally yours,
                A. B. STUBBLEFIELD,
                    Grand Master of Masons in the Republic of Liberia.


CERTIFICATE OF HEALING AND LEGALIZING MASONS AND LODGES IN THE STATE OF
TEXAS MARCH 19th, 1908.

                                          Chicago, Ill., April 25, 1908.

To All Whom This May Concern, Greeting:

Whereas, in the course of Masonic events it becomes necessary for one
regular and legitimate Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Masons to heal and
Masonically legalize Master Masons and Lodges and a Grand Lodge when the
Masonic degrees have been conferred and Masonic work in subordinate
Lodges has been irregularly and un-Masonically accomplished.

Whereas, there was a certain number of Masons viz: Chas. L. Mitchell, W.
L. Dorn, J. F. VanDuzor and their associates in the City of San Antonio,
Texas, and Phillip H. Matthews, Simon Smith of Galveston, Texas; Frank
H. Hicks, John Lowery of Taylor, Texas, James F. Harris, Nelson W. Day
of Hempstead, Texas, and several other brethren residing in the various
parts of the State of Texas, having received the degrees of Freemasonry
in an unlawful and irregular and illegitimate manner and,

Whereas, application having been made by the above named brethren and
their associates in the State of Texas and the Masonic Lodges which the
above named brethren were members of in the State of Texas to the Most
Worshipful St. John's Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Masons of the State of
Illinois and Masonic jurisdiction to be regularly healed and Masonically
legalized as Master Mason and members of the various warranted Masonic
Lodges in the State of Texas.

Whereas, the petition of the above named brethren in the State of Texas
having been duly presented and considered in open session of the Most
Worshipful St. John's Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Masons of the State of
Illinois in special session held in the city of Chicago, Ill., on the
12th of February, 1908, and the prayer of the above named petitioners
was then and there duly considered and unanimously granted.

Whereas, the Most Worshipful St. John's Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Masons
of the State of Illinois and Masonic jurisdiction having in open session
duly instructed and empowered the Grand Master of the Most Worshipful
St. John's Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Masons of the State of Illinois and
Masonic jurisdiction to repair to the State of Texas and there proceed
to heal and Masonically legalize the Lodges and the above named brethren
residing in the State of Texas and to assist them in the formation and
install the officers of the Most Worshipful King Solomon Grand Lodge of
A. F. & A. Masons of the State of Texas.

Therefore, be it known that I John G. Jones, 33, of the City of Chicago
and State of Illinois and Grand Master of the Most Worshipful St. John's
Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Masons of the State of Illinois and Masonic
jurisdiction did in the City of San Antonio, Texas, on the 19th of
March, 1908, did then and there under the instructions and authority of
the Most Worshipful St. John's Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Masons of the
State of Illinois did in said city of San Antonio, Texas, on the 19th of
March 1908, heal, re-obligate and Masonically legalize the above named
brethren who had conferred on them the entered apprentice, fellowcraft
and Master Masons degrees and did Masonically legalize the subordinate
Lodges in the State of Texas and did assist and was present in the
formation of the Most Worshipful King Solomon Grand Lodge of A. F. & A.
Mason of the State of Texas and did install Bro. Chas. L. Mitchell Most
Worshipful Grand Master, and the rest of the brethren as Grand Officers
of the Most Worshipful King Solomon Grand Lodge of Texas according to
the Masonic laws, rules and regulations of the craft.

And I now do proclaim to the whole Masonic world that the Most
Worshipful King Solomon Grand Lodge of the State of Texas of A. F. & A.
Masons has been regularly constituted according to the laws and land
marks of Freemasonry.

The Most Worshipful St. John's Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Masons of the
State of Illinois and jurisdiction further declare that the Most
Worshipful King Solomon Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Masons of the State of
Texas is the only regular and lawful Grand Lodge of Colored Masons in
the State of Texas.

    Yours Fraternally,
        JOHN G. JONES, Grand Master.


[Illustration]

MOST WORSHIPFUL KING SOLOMON GRAND LODGE, ANCIENT, FREE AND ACCEPTED
MASONS OF THE STATE OF TEXAS, AND JURISDICTION ORGANIZED ON THE 19th DAY
OF MARCH 1908 AT SAN ANTONIO.

A Masonic Convention of several warranted Lodges of Ancient, Free and
Accepted Masons of the State of Texas, assembled in Masonic Convention
in the city of San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas, on the 19th day of
March 1908, and lawfully organized Most Worshipful King Solomon Grand
Lodge of Ancient Free and Accepted Masons of the State of Texas and
Masonic jurisdiction, and the grand officers were elected and installed.

The Grand Officers were installed by Bro. John G. Jones, Grand Master of
the Most Worshipful St. Johns Grand Lodge of A. F. and A. M. of the
State of Illinois.

Addresses were made by several of the brethren and after the transaction
of considerable business, charges were preferred against Bro. K. R.
Rogers of Austin, Texas, and he was expelled for un-Masonic conduct,
from rights and privileges of Free Masonry.


[Illustration]

KEYSTONE GRAND CHAPTER OF ROYAL ARCH MASONS FOR THE STATE OF TEXAS AND
JURISDICTION, ORGANIZED MARCH 20th, 1908, AT SAN ANTONIO, TEXAS.

A Masonic convention of seven Chapters of Royal Arch Masons met in
convention and organized a Keystone Grand Chapter of Royal Arch Masons
for the State of Texas, and the Grand Officers were elected and
installed. The Grand officers were installed by Companion John G. Jones.
33rd degree of Chicago, Ill., Most Excellent Grand High Priest of the
Grand Chapter of Royal Arch Masons for the State of Illinois.

Companion K. R. Rogers, 33rd degree of Austin, Texas, was expelled for
un-Masonic conduct from all the rights and privileges of Royal
Arch-Masonry.


[Illustration]

MOUNT CALVARY GRAND COMMANDERY, KNIGHT TEMPLARS FOR THE STATE OF TEXAS
AND MASONIC JURISDICTION, ORGANIZED ON THE 20th DAY OF MARCH, 1908, AT
SAN ANTONIO, TEXAS.

A convention of Knight Templars, and representatives from seven (7)
warranted Commanderies of Knight Templars in the State of Texas met in
convention on March 20th, 1908, at San Antonio, and organized the Mount
Calvary Grand Commandery of Knight Templars for the State of Texas. The
Grand Officers were elected and Installed by Most Eminent Sir John G.
Jones, 33rd degree Grand Master of the Grand Encampment of Knight
Templars of the United States and Canada.

Sir K. R. Rogers, of Austin, Texas, was expelled for unbecoming Masonic
conduct, from Knighthood throughout the world. All Sir Knights and all
Commanderies of Knight Templars are hereby notified of the same.


[Illustration]

ORIENTAL GRAND TEMPLE MYSTIC SHRINE, ORGANIZED MARCH 20, 1908

A convention of Mystic Shrine and representatives from several Temples
met in convention on March 20, 1908, and organized the Oriental Grand
Temple. Grand officers were elected and installed by Noble John G.
Jones, 33rd degree Imperial Grand Potentate of the Imperial Grand
Council of North and South America. Noble K. R. Rogers, 33rd degree was
tried, found guilty and expelled for un-Masonic conduct from all the
rights and privileges of the Mystic Shrine.


ST. JOHN'S GRAND CONSISTORY, A. A. S. R. ORGANIZED MARCH 21, 1908.

A convention of S. P. R. S., 32nd degree and representatives met in
convention and organized St. John's Grand Consistory on March 21, 1908.
Grand officers were duly installed by Ill. John G. Jones, 33rd M. P.
Sov. Grand commander of the United Supreme Council, A. A. S. R., U. S.
A.

Ill. K. R. Rogers was expelled for gross un-Masonic conduct for life.

At the annual session of 1905, John A. Bell, 33, of Grand Rapids, Mich.,
Wm. Gray, 33, H. W. Knight, 33, of Chicago, Ill., Daniel Brown, 33, of
Rosebud, Ala., and at a special session held at San Antonio, Texas,
March 20th, 1908, K. R. Rogers, 33, of Austin, Texas, was expelled for
un-Masonic conduct from all the rights and privileges of the A. A. S.
Rite throughout the world.

Copy of original letter from John G. Jones, to K. R. Rogers.

                                        Chicago, Ill., March 25th, 1908.

[Illustration]

    Mr. K. R. Rogers, 33,
        Austin, Texas.

You are hereby notified that at a special session of the United Supreme
Council of the Ancient Accepted Scottish Rite Masons of the 33rd degree
held at San Antonio, Texas, on the 20th of March, 1908, that charges for
un-Masonic conduct were preferred against you, and after the charges had
been thoroughly investigated you was found guilty of un-Masonic conduct,
and was expelled for un-Masonic conduct from the United Supreme Council
of the 33rd degree. And from all the rights and privileges of Scottish
Rite Freemasonry throughout the world and the craft is hereby notified
of the same.

No further correspondence with you will be necessary or required.

    Yours Fraternally,
        JOHN G. JONES, 33,
            Sov. Grand Commander.


EXCERPTS FROM THE MASONIC GUIDE.

Official Organ of the Supreme Grand Council of the Ancient Accepted
Scottish Rite Masons of the Southern and Western Jurisdiction of the
United States of America.

Montgomery, Ala., April 11, 1908--King Solomon Grand Lodge of the Lone
Star State (Texas) has been legally organized, 19th day of March, 1908,
at San Antonio, Texas. Ill. C. L. Mitchell, 33, Grand Master, 310
Monterey Street, San Antonio; Ill. J. F. VanDuzor, Grand Secretary; K.
R. Rogers, 33d, of Austin, was expelled. Mount Calvary Grand Commandery
Knights Templars and Keystone Grand Chapter of Royal Arch Masons, were
organized by Ill. John G. Jones, 33d, G. G. C. of Chicago. All of this
grand work was done on March 19th and 20th, 1908. Ill. John G. Jones is
destined to capture the United States. Ill. C. L. Mitchell, 33d, will
lead Texas against all opposition and perfidy. Hurrah for the Texas
invincible. The German Grand Lodge of Alabama, A. F. and A. Masons,
extend them the right hand of fellowship. We will gladly accept a
fraternal representative from that jurisdiction, as this is the only
Legal Grand Masonic Lodge organized in Texas.

Montgomery, Ala., June 20, 1908--The Grand Lodge over which Mr. J. W.
McKinney, of Texas, presides is spurious and bogus, and belongs to the
original Prince Hall Clandestine National Compact Grand Lodge of Masons
of Boston, Mass. He has no Masonic authority in the world for operating
Masonry in the State of Texas. Ill. C. L. Mitchell, 33d, is the only
legal Grand Master of A. F. & A. M. in Texas, and all intelligent
gentlemen like Dr. Sparks, of Terrell, Tex., and others will allow Ill.
Mitchell, of San Antonio, Texas, to heal and Masonically set them right.


EXTRACT FROM THE HISTORY OF BOGUS MASONRY AMONG COLORED MEN IN MISSOURI.

By Capt. W. T. Grant, thirty-third degree Grand Master, St. Andrews
Grand Lodge, A. F. & A. M. of the State of Louisiana, and President of
the International Bureau of Masonic Information of the World, viz.:

Seventh Question--Are you acquainted with Brother Chas. L. Mitchell, 33
degree Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of Texas?

Seventh Answer--Yes. I am well acquainted with him. Bro. Chas. L.
Mitchell is a Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of Texas and is a
prominent and distinguished Mason, and a very reliable and honest man.
He is a man and Mason that stands high in the estimation of the people
all over the country. He has the power and authority to organize Masonic
Lodges in the State of Missouri, and all Masonic work done by him is
regular and genuine, for there is not now a lawful and genuine Masonic
Lodge, nor Grand Lodge in the State of Missouri, except the Lodges that
Bro. Chas. L. Mitchell, 33d degree has organized.


STATE OF TEXAS COUNTY OF BEXAR.

Personally came before me Chas. L. Mitchell, who being by me duly sworn,
declares that he is the Grand Master of M. W. King Solomon Grand Lodge
of A. F. & A. Masons of the State of Texas, and Masonic jurisdiction and
acting under the instruction and authority of the M. W. King Solomon
Grand Lodge of the State of Texas, and Masonic Jurisdiction; that
affiant went to the State of Missouri and was in the city of St. Louis,
Mo., on July 4, A. D., 1908, and affiant did in the city of St. Louis,
Mo., on July 4, A. D., 1908, regularly obligate and Masonically set
right according to the ancient custom, rules and regulation of the
craft. Bro. J. J. Edwards, Henry J. Harbert, Sterling Grey, A. W.
Prentiss, A. B. Shriver, E. J. Wade and others residing in the city of
St. Louis, Mo., under the power and authority of the M. W. King Solomon
Grand Lodge A. F. & A. Masons of the State of Texas and Masonic
Jurisdiction.

Officers of C. L. Mitchell Lodge No. 1, A. F. & A. Masons: J. J. Edwards
W. M.; Henry J. Harbert, S. W.; B. Henderson, J. W.: S. Reed, W. T.; H.
Newcomb, W. S.; Frank Dorsey, S. D.; E. J. Wade, J. D.: H. W. Prentess,
S. S.; Milton Henderson, J. S.; A. B. Shriver, Chaplain; Sterling Grey,
Tyler.

Affiant further says that the C. L. Mitchell Lodge No. 1 of St. Louis,
Mo., has been regularly organized in the City of St. Louis, Mo., on the
fourth day of July, A. D., 1908, according to the Ancient custom and
landmark of the Order, and it is recognized by us to be the only lawful
and genuine Lodge of Colored Masons in the State of Missouri.

    C. L. MITCHELL. 33rd Degree G. M.,
    M. W. KING, Solomon Grand Lodge. A. F. & A. M. of Texas.

    Sworn to before me this 16th day of December, A. D., 1908.
    (Seal).
        L. W. GREENLY,
        Notary Public, Bexar County, Texas.


LEGALIZING MASONS IN THE STATE OF ARKANSAS AUGUST 7, 8, 9 AND 10, 1908.

To All Whom This May Concern, Greeting:

Whereas, in the course of Masonic events it becomes necessary for one
regular and legitimate Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Masons to heal and
Masonically legalize Master Masons and Lodges and a Grand Lodge.

Whereas, There was certain numbers of Masons, viz: R. Amos, Isaac
Butler, M. F. Leon, H. C. Leon and their associates of the City of
Montrose, Ark., J. C. Parker, R. B. Morehead, B. G. Head, A. W. Spears,
R. B. Hockenhull and others of Pine Bluff, Ark., C. W. Ross, J. L. Brown
and others of Readland, Ark., C. J. Jefferson, K. P. Ross. A. McDonald
and others of Sun Shine, Ark., and several others in the State of
Arkansas, C. W. Ross, E. E. Perryman, J. L. Brown and others of Eudora,
Ark.

Whereas application having been made by the above named brethren and
their associates in the State of Arkansas, and the Masonic Lodges of
which the above named brethren were members of in the State of Arkansas.
The M. W. King Solomon, Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Masons of the State of
Texas and Masonic jurisdiction to be Masonically legalized as Master
Masons and members of various warranted Masonic Lodges in the State of
Arkansas.

Whereas, The M. W. King Solomon Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Ma-kansas
having been duly presented and considered in open session of the M. W.
King Solomon Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Masons of the State of Texas in
special session held in the City of San Antonio, Texas, on the 4th day
of August, A. D., 1908, and the prayer of the above named petitioners
was then and there duly considered and unanimously granted.

Whereas, The M. W. King Solomon Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. M. Masons of
the State of Texas and Masonic jurisdiction having in open session duly
instructed and empowered the Grand Master of the M. W. King Solomon
Grand Lodge of the A. F. & A. Masons of the State of Texas and Masonic
jurisdiction to repair to the State of Arkansas and there proceed to
Masonically legalize the Lodges and the above named brethren residing in
the State of Arkansas, and to assist them in the formation and install
the officers of the M. W. Hiram Grand Lodge, A. F. & A. Masons of the
State of Arkansas.

Therefore, be it known that I. C. L. Mitchell, 33rd degree of the City
of San Antonio, State of Texas, and Grand Master of the M. W. King
Solomon Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Masons of the State of Texas and
Masonic jurisdiction did in the City of Montrose, Ark., on the 7th day
of August, A. D., 1908, did then and there under the instruction and
authority of the M. W. King Solomon Grand Lodge A. F. & A. Masons of the
State of Texas did in said City of Montrose, Ark., on the 7th day of
Aug. A. D., 1908, obligate and Masonically legalize the above named
brethren and did Masonically legalize the subordinate Lodges in the
State of Arkansas, and did assist and was present in the formation of
the M. W. Hiram Grand Lodge of the A. F. & A. Masons of the State of
Arkansas and did install Brothers Ralph Amos, M. W., Grand Master and
J. C. Parker, Grand Secretary and the rest of the brethren as grand
officers of the M. W. Hiram Grand Lodge of Arkansas according to the
Masonic laws, rules and regulations of the craft.

And, I, now do proclaim to the whole Masonic world that the M. W. Hiram
Grand Lodge of the State of Arkansas of the A. F. & A. Masons has been
regularly constituted according to laws, landmarks of Freemasonry. The
M. W. King Solomon Grand Lodge of A. F. & A. Masons of the State of
Texas and Masonic jurisdiction further declare that the M. W. Hiram
Grand Lodge of the A. F. & A. Masons of the State of Arkansas is the
only regular and lawful Grand Lodge of Colored Masons in the State of
Arkansas.

    Fraternally Yours,
        C. L. MITCHELL 33rd Degree.
            Grand Master M. W. K. S. G. L., A. F. &. A. Masons of
                Texas and Masonic Jurisdiction.




Transcriber's Note:

Changes have been made to the original publication as follows:

    Preface:
        realized by my brethern _changed to_
        realized by my brethren

        styled--Illigitimate Prince Hall Grand Lodge _changed to_
        styled--Illegitimate Prince Hall Grand Lodge

        of the United States, its' _changed to_
        of the United States, its

    Page 1:
        neccessary to state the time and place that _changed to_
        necessary to state the time and place that

        that it occurrd _changed to_
        that it occurred

    Page 2:
        and these wiley fellows and _changed to_
        and these wily fellows and

        in the state of Mass _changed to_
        in the state of Mass.

        African Grand Lodge of Modern Mason of Mass. _changed to_
        African Grand Lodge of Modern Masons of Mass.

    Page 3:
        and genuine mason he it a _changed to_
        and genuine mason he is a

        land and in every coutry, _changed to_
        land and in every country,

    Page 4:
        letter "Y" originated, Prince Edwin _changed to_
        letter "Y" originated. Prince Edwin

        the Grand Lodge that was orgrnized at York _changed to_
        the Grand Lodge that was organized at York

        Prince Edwin, the brother of King Athlestan of _changed to_
        Prince Edwin, the brother of King Athelstan of England

        an eniment and distinguished Mason and King _changed to_
        an eminent and distinguished Mason and King

        Athlestan was the grandson of King Alfred the _changed to_
        Athelstan was the grandson of King Alfred the first

        annointed King of England who translated the _changed to_
        anointed King of England who translated the

    Page 6:
        valuminous articles _changed to_
        voluminous articles

        has on several occassion _changed to_
        has on several occasions

        refer to Genaral Gages Military Regiment being _changed to_
        refer to General Gages Military Regiment being

        And upon futher investigation of this matter _changed to_
        And upon further investigation of this matter

        General Gages Millitary Regiment which Prince Hall _changed to_
        General Gages Military Regiment which Prince Hall

        of the Grand Lodge of New York on Oct, 25th 1848 _changed to_
        of the Grand Lodge of New York on Oct. 25th 1848

    Page 7:
        documentry evidence that has ever
        documentary evidence that has ever

    Page 8:
        to you and the brethern in your country as to a _changed to_
        to you and the brethren in your country as to a

    Page 10:
        are admitted in any of the Masonic bodys _changed to_
        are admitted in any of the Masonic bodies

        Grand Lodges in This County and _changed to_
        Grand Lodges in This Country and

    Page 11:
        irregular and clandestine and predicted _changed to_
        irregular and clandestine and predicated

        nothing but breed dissention _changed to_
        nothing but breed dissension

    Page 12:
        and the second irrigeular _changed to_
        and the second irregular

    Page 15:
        Spingfield, Ill., Jos. H. Banks of Providence _changed to_
        Springfield, Ill., Jos. H. Banks of Providence

    Page 16:
        STATS WAS HELD AT OMAHA, NEB., MAY THE 10th _changed to_
        STATES WAS HELD AT OMAHA, NEB., MAY THE 10th

        Pennsylvaniia. The case came up before _changed to_
        Pennsylvanyia. The case came up before

    Page 17:
        Alfred the first annointed King of England who _changed to_
        Alfred the first anointed King of England who

    Page 18:
        after Mount Bonnel Lodge was _changed to_
        after Mount Bonnell Lodge was

        that was Mounte Bonnell Lodge at Austin _changed to_
        that was Mount Bonnell Lodge at Austin

        Cuny was elected Grand Master and J. J. Hamilton was _changed to_
        Cuney was elected Grand Master and J. J. Hamilton was

        of since its was instituted in an _changed to_
        of since it was instituted in an

    Page 20
        24th day of June Amo _changed to_
        24th day of June Anno

        North America, this 24th day of June Amo _changed to_
        North America, this 24th day of June Anno

    Page 21
        bigus, counterfeit grand body, and _changed to_
        bogus, counterfeit grand body, and

        Grand Master and Grand Wardens, and brethern
        Grand Master and Grand Wardens, and brethren

    Page 22
        brethern and their successors to have and _changed to_
        brethren and their successors to have and

        brethern and their successors in office to _changed to_
        brethren and their successors in office to

        brethern and their successors to have _changed to_
        brethren and their successors to have

        brethern to attend the Most Worshipful _changed to_
        brethren to attend the Most Worshipful

        the officers and brethern of said Grand _changed to_
        the officers and brethren of said Grand

    Page 23
        CHICAGO, SEPT, 4th, 1877. _changed to_
        CHICAGO, SEPT., 4th, 1877.

    Page 24
        by this grand Lodge. _changed to_
        by this Grand Lodge.

    Page 25
        Accepted Scottinsh Rite _changed to_
        Accepted Scottish Rite

        degree it is suprious and _changed to_
        degree it is spurious and

    Page 26
        by organizing Mt. Bonnel Lodge _changed to_
        by organizing Bonnell Lodge

        with N. W. Cuny as the _changed to_
        with N. W. Cuney as the

        succeeded N. W. Cuny as Grand _changed to_
        succeeded N. W. Cuney as Grand

        that was held in Pittsburg, Pa. _changed to_
        that was held in Pittsburgh, Pa.

        Bro. W. T. Grant,, _changed to_
        Bro. W. T. Grant,

    Page 27
        regular and legitmate Grand Lodge of _changed to_
        regular and legitimate Grand Lodge of

        Chas. L. W. L. Dorn, J. F. VanDuzor _changed to_
        Chas. L., W. L. Dorn, J. F. VanDuzor

    Page 28
        charges were prefrred against _changed to_
        charges were preferred against

    Page 29
        MOUNT CALVARY GRAND COMMANDRY, KNIGHT _changed to_
        MOUNT CALVARY GRAND COMMANDERY, KNIGHT

        warranted Commandrys of Knight Templars in _changed to_
        warranted Commanderies of Knight Templars in the

        organized the Mount Calvary Grand Commandry _changed to_
        organized the Mount Calvary Grand Commandery of Knight

        Commandreys of Knight Templars are hereby _changed to_
        Commanderies of Knight Templars are hereby

    Page 31
        street San Antonio; _changed to_
        Street, San Antonio;

    Page 33
        regulations of the craft, _changed to_
        regulations of the craft.

    Page 32 The text has been transcribed as in the original
            publication but words appear to be missing between
            "Ma-" and "kansas" which is split at the end of a
            line in the original





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Early Introduction of Bogus
Freemasonry in the United States of America and Texas Among Colored Masons, by Charles L. Mitchell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EARLY INTRODUCTION OF ***

***** This file should be named 40234.txt or 40234.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/2/3/40234/

Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
