The Project Gutenberg EBook of Peachmonk, by John Eyerman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Peachmonk
       A Serio-Comic Detective Tale in Which No Fire-Arms Are
       Used and No One is Killed

Author: John Eyerman

Release Date: July 16, 2012 [EBook #40253]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PEACHMONK ***




Produced by Robert Cicconetti, Dave Hobart and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









                                PEACHMONK

                  A SERIO-COMIC DETECTIVE TALE IN WHICH NO
                   FIRE-ARMS ARE USED AND NO ONE IS KILLED
                  BEING A THREE DAYS EPISODE IN THE LIFE OF
                     THE DUKE OF BELLEVILLE AS RELATED BY
                            LORD EDWARD LYNDON


                               JOHN EYERMAN


                                 NEW YORK
                                   1917




The fabric of this tale is based largely upon the use of Book-Titles, and
the names, several names in connection, or expressions in CAPITALS, which
indicate these titles, should in no way interfere with the continuous
reading of the story.

No Title, of either one or more words, is used more than once, unless
such title is represented by more than one Author.

Approximately, Nine Hundred Book-Titles have been used.


No Literary Merit is claimed for this Tale, as none has been attempted.
The following Letter explains itself:


                                                BARCHESTER TOWERS,
                                                   KENILWORTH.
                                                    Saturday.

     Dear Eyerman:

     When we were talking the other night at MRS. PERKIN'S BALL, I
     was just about to ask you a favor, when OUR MUTUAL FRIEND,
     ADDISON, with his usual lack of GOOD FORM FOR ALL OCCASIONS,
     decided to fasten himself to us: AFTERWARD, AT THE CASA
     NAPOLEON, THE AMERICANS tied me up. I am glad to say that I am
     now FAR FROM THE MADDING CROWDS, and VILETTE, THE BEAUTIFUL
     WRETCH that she is, has urged me to write you.

     When Scarlett's eye-troubles began he decided to amuse himself
     by dictating to MISS MARJORIBANKS, THE STORY OF MY LIFE, as he
     called it * * * * Ten days ago, and to my AMAZEMENT, he was
     ordered to INDIA and his work is not completed, and I am no
     good at that kind of thing. I want YOU to undertake the WORK,
     and Scarlett wants you too. Don't refuse, please.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Present or absent, I trust, my dear fellow, that you will
     think of me always as your sincere friend.

                                              Belleville.




My PRINTERS have informed me that ALL THINGS CONSIDERED, it will be best
to omit the Introduction, as it is "NOT IN IT" with the tale, WHICH was
to have followed.

NOW, at first, I considered this all STUFF AND NONSENSE, for I am sure I
know MORE about CLEVER TALES, than they do about printed MATTER, and I
believe that I am considered one of the best DESCRIPTIVE WRITERS in GREAT
BRITAIN, and certainly can write SKETCHES AND STORIES; however, "IT'S UP
TO YOU," but when the printers told me that the question would be asked
"WHO WROTE THAT?" to be followed by the remark "IT'S GREAT TO BE CRAZY,"
I decided that as MY BROTHER AND I are PALS FIRST, FOR HIS SAKE, the
Introduction, AS A MATTER OF COURSE, must be omitted.




                CONTENTS

       I: BEGINNING OF THE TALE
      II: INTRODUCES THE HERO
     III: INTRODUCES MARJORIE
      IV: INTRODUCES THE VILLAIN
       V: WHAT THE VILLAIN DID
      VI: INTRODUCES THE HEROINE
     VII: THE CRISIS
    VIII: THE GRAND FINALE




PEACHMONK




I: BEGINNING OF THE TALE.


When one sees THE HONEY BEE constructing his little hexagonal CELL, and
the SPIDERS weaving their webs and bridges, with all the accuracy of the
ENGINEER, which operations are not ACCIDENTALS, one is inclined to ask:
is one MAKING THE MOST OF ONE'S MIND? Candidly: I DON'T KNOW: perhaps
not; but I do know from a scientific standpoint, the comparison is not
permissible; still it makes ONE think. However, what is most apparent to
me is that I am in THE CLUTCH OF CIRCUMSTANCES, and I have to write this
tale; THEREFORE, ONCE UPON A TIME, as all stories should begin, a certain
successful debutante, known as LADY ROSE'S DAUGHTER, THE LADY EVELYN, sat
in her boudoir in THE HOUSE THAT JACK BUILT, IN LONDON TOWN, looking at
THE FACE IN THE GIRANDOLE, and listening to THE CHIMES of the SILVER
BELLS, announcing THE ELEVENTH-HOUR. This room, like THE CIRCULAR STUDY
on the floor below, was hung with GOBELINS, between which, at regular
intervals, were hung original DRAWINGS OF GAINSBOROUGH, the floor being
covered with that world-famous textile, THE CARPET FROM BAGDAD, while
upon a magnificent LOUIS XIV stand were some exquisite specimens of
SALT-GLAZED STONEWARE, stamped with THE GREEN SEAL.

Through THE OPEN SHUTTERS came the VOICE OF THE STREET, and from distant
KENNEDY SQUARE, the occasional bark of THE GOLDEN-GREYHOUND,
intermingled with the soft lapping noise of THE MOVING OF THE WATERS in
THE POND IN THE MARSHY MEADOW.

MAMZELLE FIFINE, her ladyship's maid, was in the act of affixing THE
JEWEL OF THE SEVEN STARS to her ladyship's beautiful new Peqiun CREATION,
when VIVIETTE, one of the parlour maids entered, carrying a box.
"MILADI," said THE EXPERT MAID-SERVANT, "this box was left but a moment
ago and DENIS DUVAL told me to bring it to your ladyship at once, as THE
MESSENGER said it contained FAMILY SECRETS; there is a key in this sealed
envelope."

THE VERMILION BOX, upon being opened with THE DIAMOND KEY, disclosed A
RED LILY, to which was attached a card bearing the short inscription,
"LEST WE FORGET," and the INITIALS ONLY, TO M. L. G.

NOW, the Lady Evelyn, being A DIPLOMATIC WOMAN, NOWADAYS, not unusual,
expressed her astonishment in but seven WORDS, "AT LAST, THE TRUTH ABOUT
THE CASE," and continuing said, "Viviette, draw THE CRIMSON BLIND, see
that MY STUDY FIRE is lighted, and ask ANN BOYD, the housekeeper, to come
to me at once."

The housekeeper entered almost immediately.

"Boyd," said HER LADYSHIP, "I shall postpone MY IRISH JOURNEY, TO-DAY; I
believe that before the TWELFTH NIGHT from now, I shall know who this
GABRIELLE TRANSGRESSOR is, in fact I intend to know if it take FIVE YEARS
TO FIND OUT; go to the Circular Study, and consult the last WHO'S WHO IN
MUSIC AND DRAMA, and let me know what it says about MADEMOISELLE CELESTE
of the Gaiety THEATRE; then telephone 2835 MAYFAIR, and ask WERNER, THE
COUNT'S CHAUFFEUR to go to number NINETY-THREE, MANSFIELD PARK, to-night
at nine o'clock, and finally tell BETTY THE SCRIBE to write a note of
acceptance to the private seance of VERA THE MEDIUM; and this afternoon,
if you care to, you may take your sister HELEN'S BABIES, SUSANNA AND SUE,
to WUTHERING HEIGHTS to see the HYPOTEMNODON, or, if you prefer, to
WAVERLEY to visit your UNCLE REMUS AND BR'ER RABBIT."




II: INTRODUCES THE HERO.


THE Duke of Belleville, having arrived at THE STAGE DOOR of the Gaiety
Theatre, just ten minutes late, had failed to keep his appointment, and
had been informed by the door-man MR. PRATT that Mademoiselle Celeste had
left word that he was to go on to the Savoy, where she expected to have
supper and wanted the Duke to join the party.

The Duke, somewhat annoyed, but being made of THE RIGHT STUFF, as let us
hope all gentlemen are, merely remarked:

"I shall go IN SEARCH OF MADEMOISELLE" and turning, he pushed his way
through A MOTLEY crowd, the usual TYPES FROM CITY STREETS, regained his
motor, at the same time deciding to FIRST go to his chambers, ROUND THE
CORNER IN GAY STREET, to have a little chat with his friend, HENRY
ESMOND, who had adjoining chambers and who was THE FIRST SECRETARY to THE
PRIME MINISTER, and who was leaving on the morrow for EQUATORIAL AMERICA
to study THE NEGRO PROBLEM and the AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY.

AT THE OPEN DOOR to his chambers, the Duke was met by his man, Jameson,
who said,

"There is a LADY awaiting your Grace."

"Well, Jameson, who is THE MIDNIGHT GUEST?"

"I really don't know, your Grace, THE MYSTERIOUS STRANGER is closely
veiled and will not give her name."

"Very well, there is no ALTERNATIVE, I'll see her, and, Jameson, remain
within call."

"GOOD EVENING, MY LADY OF DOUBT," said the Duke, "may I ask to
whom--great heavens, Evelyn, what are you doing here at this time of
NIGHT? Surely the WORLD'S END IS NEAR; WHAT WILL PEOPLE SAY? Your
independence, to say the least, is somewhat disconcerting; why not
telephone?"

"JACK, you are positively hateful; I could not telephone my message--no
EAVESDROPPER, I trust--I believe I am on the verge of discovering LORD
CAMMERLEIGH'S SECRET, and I want you to accompany ME to-morrow to THE
MATRIMONIAL BUREAU of THE PRINCESS DEHRA, that SORCERESS OF ROME, who has
many LITTLE STORIES, LAID UP IN LAVENDER and can always find THE MAN
HIGHER UP."

"OH, I SAY, Evelyn, you certainly do lead A SINGULAR LIFE; you know I am
not interested in these so-called TRUE STORIES OF CRIME and most
unfortunately, too, I am taking THE 10.12 EXPRESS to Brighton; however, I
shall be very pleased, you know, to go with you on Monday."

"Thank you, JACK, but I AM AFRAID that is quite impracticable, and I am
sorely disappointed: you certainly took more than a passive interest in
the recovery of THE EUSTACE DIAMONDS; now, it seems you never have the
time for anything; of course it is well known that THE BEAUTY, this
Gaiety star, always goes to BRIGHTON on Sunday, and I am told, by the
10.12 Express; I really do not understand your INFATUATION for this WILD
WINGS; but I dare say it's the WAY OF MAN, IN THE ARENA of course; it's
THE TREND of the times: however, MAJOR VIGOUREAUX will be only too
delighted to go with me, but I wanted you, you foolish boy, you are
certainly A CHANGED MAN, and I do hope you are not PLAYING WITH FIRE,
but...."

"Beg pardon, your Grace," interrupted Jameson, entering,
"Detective-Inspector Morgan is below, and desires particularly to see
your Grace."

"Let him come up, Jameson, and conduct the lady to the North lift."

"And, BY THE WAY, Evelyn, I'm opening the Eaton Square house and shall
have a surprise for you: here, don't forget THE VANITY BOX."

"Well, JACK, good-bye, I suppose I'm turned out, MARION'S VACATION,
begins next week, and I'm taking her to THE DOCTOR'S LITTLE GIRL,
ELIZABETH HOBART AT EXETER HALL."

"Inspector Morgan," announces Jameson.

"Sorry to trouble you, your Grace: the lady...."

"Now, look here, MY MAN, the lady is my cousin."

"EXCUSE ME, your Grace, I quite understand: no harm intended: I thought I
recognized the LITTLE LADY as one of the LIGHT FINGERED GENTRY; beg
pardon, I'm sure; I came particularly to ask your Grace's aid regarding
the so-called MYSTERIOUS MR. SABIN; we believe he was THE MAN INSIDE, THE
MYSTERY OF THE MIDDLE-TEMPLE, although fortunately for himself, he keeps
well WITHIN THE LAW; this slippery TENNESSEE SHAD was at lunch to-day
with Miss Celeste of the Gaiety--nothing wrong with your Grace, I
hope--great show on there; your Grace probably recalls the timely advice
you gave us regarding THE CARLTON CASE; well, SIR MORTIMER, my chief, had
HOPE that your Grace would again be able to advise us."

"I fear not, in this case, Morgan, in fact I don't want to stand in
ANOTHER MAN'S SHOES, THE MAN IN THE BASEMENT was really responsible for
that advice."

"Then I shall INTERVIEW, THE LODGER; WHAT'S HIS NAME, your Grace?"

"That is OUT OF THE QUESTION, Morgan; you are like the DOG in the hands
of the express company: you've eaten your TAG and don't know where you
are to go; too late; THE PEOPLE DOWNSTAIRS, I am told, left yesterday for
TROIS SEMAINES EN FRANCE, which means, of course, SOJOURNING, SHOPPING
AND STUDYING IN PARIS; and now you must go, as I have an appointment,
long overdue; take a cigar, Morgan, from THE BRASS BOWL, over there, and
IN AFTER YEARS, you will remember that particular brand, as it is pure
HEMP, and if you are going HOME, take that PURPLE FERN to your wife's
MOTHER, for a chance like this only comes ONCE TO EVERY MAN, and GOOD
NIGHT."




III: INTRODUCES MARJORIE.


MARJORIE'S VACATION was fast approaching its end; SHE and her friend
MARIETTA, BY FORCE OF CIRCUMSTANCES, were conducting a flourishing
TYPE-WRITING establishment, JUST BETWEEN THEMSELVES, at THE HOUSE ON
CHERRY STREET, on THE SUNNY SIDE OF THE STREET, so that PASSERS-BY could
see THE WAY UP, and they always allowed themselves, as a VACATION, LITTLE
JOURNEYS of a fortnight's duration IN THAMESLAND or among THE ALPS.

Marjorie and her very best friend, BETTY STANDISH, were seated under THE
PLUM TREE, but obviously, not at a time when the fruit was over-ripe, in
THE GARDEN AT NO. 19, in that historic spot, CHANTREY LAND, as the old
village of Norton, DERBYSHIRE, is called, having just been served with a
second instalment of TEA, by TILLIE A MENNONITE MAID, who carried with
her, THE GLEAM of LOCAL COLOR. The girls had just had an exceedingly
trying two hours' visit from THE MAYOR'S WIFE, one of THE RAVENELS, and
whose only TOPICS FOR CONVERSATION, IN A NUTSHELL, were invariably IN
DEFENSE of her FAMILY; that she was following IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF THE
BRONTES, and always ended with the statement that her BIG BROTHER, JOHN
HENRY SMITH, THE ARCHDEACON, had ordered the removal of THE OLD PEABODY
PEW, despite THE WARNING OF SEXTON MAGINNIS, that THE MONK'S TREASURE
would not be found in that part of THE LONELY CHURCH of ST. JUDE'S and
to-day, in addition to these thread-bare topics, she announced to her
hearers, that ON GOING TO CHURCH, she had passed AT CLOSE RANGE, LORD
LONDON, and his SISTER CARRIE, taking some STRAY BIRDS and TOY DOGS to
the ABANDONED, HILL-TOP FARM (to see the DOG STARS) and finally, that her
husband, SIR JOHN CONSTANTINE, had always been A SERVANT OF THE PUBLIC:
in fact, with the Mayor's wife, it was always, I MYSELF and my family,
and the young girls were at the point of collapse, when THE CRISIS came,
and THE EGOTISTICAL I, lady took her departure.

BETTY had picked up the INEVITABLE, MRS. RORER'S COOKBOOK, for she liked
THE FUN OF COOKING, in order to decide WHAT TO HAVE FOR DINNER, and with
the HOPE of making an entire change in the SUNDAY NIGHT SUPPERS, for one
can not subsist solely on BAKERS' BREAD or CREAM TOASTS.

"BETTY dear," said Marjorie, "I have come to the conclusion that THE CARD
SYSTEM IN THE OFFICE is valueless to US."

"Of course it is, if you say so; what does Marietta think? but listen; is
that MUSIC or someone in distress?"

For from HERE AND THERE came the sound of MUSIC; Oh! such NERVE-racking,
BROKEN MUSIC; Marjorie, at once, hastened to THE GIANT'S GATE, the last
remnant of Blunderbore castle, which once occupied the site of the
present house, to find the guilty person, and there discovered a
wretched-looking individual, with two still more wretched-looking
ANIMALS, which the man called THE TEDDY BEARS.

Now, as Marjorie believed, that in THE TRAINING OF WILD ANIMALS, one
should first secure their FRIENDSHIP, she, WITH THE BEST INTENTION, gave
each of the bears a piece of COTTAGE PIE, and this is no joke, either;
for bears LOVE this particular kind of pie; as a matter of fact, DIDO THE
DANCING BEAR, considers it THE RIGHT STUFF, and much prefers it to the
flesh of THE SALAMANDER, and in A SPIRIT OF MIRTH, she gave THE IMMORTAL
CHARLATAN some SIX PENNY PIECES, to take his PETS to NORTHANGER ABBEY, to
SERENADE the Mayor's wife, for, thought the young girl, harmless REVENGE
is sweet, and moreover she may be AT DEATH'S DOOR, after the trying time
she gave us.

"Betty, DEAR, I am so happy; we have had so many HAPPY DAYS and yet, I
shall be glad to return to THE CITY OF PLEASURE; is it not strange that
I, A MILLIONAIRE GIRL, should have to earn my own living, because of AN
OPERA AND LADY GRASMERE? but what am I saying? THE DAWN OF A TO-MORROW
is still far away; Horrors; there goes that fearful client of mine across
THE LONG ROAD: I am frightened. WHAT IS COMING? what does she want here?"

"Marjorie, tell me, what is worrying you? let us be COMRADES IN ARMS; let
me help you as I helped the FIVE LITTLE PEPPERS, IN THE LITTLE BROWN
HOUSE; let me be THE CUSTODIAN of your secret."

"Yes, dear, I'll confide in you: I AM not, as you have supposed, THE
DAUGHTER OF ANDERSON CROW; I truly believe I am Lord Cammerleigh's CHILD,
that I have a sister, who is none other than CELESTE, THE PRIMADONNA at
the Gaiety Theatre; and from what I have gathered from a WOMAN, the same
woman who just entered THE DEVIL'S GARDEN, who comes to our office to
have senseless letters type-written and apparently to no purpose, so far
as I can understand; I say, I believe my FATHER does not know where we
are and more than that, dare not look for us on account, I say, of what
this wretched woman calls THAT AFFAIR AT ELIZABETH: a question of
WATCHFUL WAITING; it is certainly A DESPERATE CONSPIRACY, and I shall not
rest until THE CONSPIRATORS are UNMASKED AT LAST; but no more to-night:
WHAT'S THE USE, you are CHILLY: put on THE GREENMANTLE and we will stroll
along PIDGIN ISLAND, as far as DARK HOLLOW to see if our little favorite
the PUFFINUS EYERMANI is still there, and TO-MORROW we will go to
SHREWSBURY to see JOEY AT THE FAIR feeding THE DRAGON."




IV: INTRODUCES THE VILLAIN.


SHERLOCK HOLMES once remarked: "By far, the most daring investigator and
most successful elucidator of criminal mysteries is Martin Dhragnet, but
unfortunately, he always gives you the impression of being HALF A ROGUE."
In less than two years' time this same Dhragnet, having had charge of the
famous case of THE INFAMOUS JOHN FRIEND in which THE DETHRONEMENT OF THE
CITY BOSS was a possibility, sold out his principal client, SIR HENDER
O'HALLORAN, V. C., THE MEMBER FOR ARCIS, and with two of the principals,
THE GREIFFENSTEINS, FATHER AND SON, he fled to THE REPUBLIC OF CHILI,
where they BEACHED KEELS, and on the following CHRISTMAS, with EMPTY
POCKETS, and being in need of MONEY to buy the THINGS required on
CHRISTMAS DAY, took a CHANCE by stealing THE GOLDEN DOG of THE PRESIDENT
OF QUEX: escaped capture, under the cover of one of those dark ARIZONA
NIGHTS, by crossing to BOLIVIA, where as ELECTRIC ARCS were in use on
dark nights, they were finally CAGED; but this is THE SECRET HISTORY OF
TO-DAY, and really digression.

Dhragnet finally escaped WITHIN AN INCH OF HIS LIFE, by gnawing a hole
through the WHITE PINE boards of his TINDERBOX prison, swam the OCEAN and
THE PANAMA CANAL, and with THREE MEN IN A BOAT, crossed the Atlantic to
FRANCE; retired to a secluded spot in BRITTANY: then travelled in CENTRAL
ASIA AND TIBET: played THE HONEST LAWYER, INSIDE THE GERMAN EMPIRE,
hobnobbed with KINGS AND QUEENS on the RIVIERA, and IN MONTE CARLO, met
AN AMERICAN GIRL, called the CAPTIVATING MARY CARSTAIRS, with whom he
became infatuated, as she had a bank account, and notwithstanding the
fact that all her friends said, "Oh: MARY MARY, you are sailing UNCHARTED
SEAS," she was CAUGHT IN THE NET, and they were MARRIED, and the bank
account disappeared, as Dhragnet was given A FREE HAND: after THE STORM,
THE BAD TIMES came; he then formed, secretly of course, THE ROBBERIES CO.
LTD., grew a beard, and drifted to ENGLAND; located in LONDON: formed the
firm of DOMBEY & SON, in Suite 813, NUMBER 101, PARK LANE, as purveyors
of wines and where every BRAND was on sale except the one you wanted.

Strange as it may seem, Dhragnet, alias Dombey, had given considerable
thought to THE DRINK PROBLEM IN MODERN LIFE, and to all appearances did
nothing more than play DOMINOES and EAT AND GROW THIN; however, he was
merely KEEPING UP APPEARANCES, for the rear room of this suite was the
rendezvous of MANY FAMOUS IMPOSTERS, HYPOCRITES AND SINNERS: THE SHORT
CUT to prison.




V: WHAT THE VILLAIN DID.


IN THE DEAD OF NIGHT, and after strangling with a POISON BELT, THE FOX
TERRIER, asleep BEHIND THE SCREEN, and then removing his BOOTS, the
INTRUDER, Martin Dhragnet, keeping well within the SHADOW of the CANDLE
LIGHT, stealthily approached the couch, upon which the girl, Marjorie,
had thrown herself, but a short time before, to read for a fifth time,
the LETTERS OF HORACE WALPOLE as she had become much interested in THE
CASE OF DR. HORACE; but five times are too many to read, no matter whose
LETTERS they are and she was soon IN THE CLOUDS, and SLEEP overcame her.

Dhragnet gave the figure a LIGHT touch, at the same time muttering, "MY
CAPTIVE, LITTLE NEMO IN SLUMBERLAND:" but THE LAW OF LIFE at once
asserted itself, for THE HUMAN TOUCH awakened the girl, but chloroform
soon silenced her, and throwing one of the ORIENTAL RUGS over the form,
and leaving his boots behind, and which fortunately for him, did not,
later, give a clue to the owner, THE INVADER carried his burden to THE
ONE WAY OUT, down THE CIRCULAR STAIRCASE, out INTO THE NIGHT, where THE
ACCOMPLICE, one of THE GANG, awaited him, and taking THE MIDDLE COURSE
across the YARD AND GARDEN, the TWO SINNERS passed out upon THE COUNTRY
ROAD, THE ROAD made famous by JOHN GILPIN, and none too soon, for THE
TENANTS OF THE TREES were BEGINNING to announce the approach of DAWN, the
end of THE LONG NIGHT, THE MORNING OF TO-DAY.

Marjorie was indeed KIDNAPPED BY PIRATES, as the TESTIMONY OF WITNESSES,
had there been any, later on, would have proved. A short walk along THE
DRUID PATH brought THE GENTLEMAN with the KIDNAPPED girl and CHERRY, his
pal, to DEEP MOAT GRANGE, where a motor awaited them.

"Now, PICCADILLY JIM, don't ask any FOOLISH QUESTIONS," said Dhragnet,
THE DAREDEVIL; "don't stand there as if you had been STRUCK BY LIGHTNING:
this is not A FOOL'S ERRAND: we've not COME OUT TO PLAY: GREAT SNAKES, I
LITTLE KNEW what a HANDICAP the girl was going to be, an' I never have
much SUCCESS WITH HENS, an' she must weigh a ton, I GUESS: but WHEN THE
HOUR CAME, and IN SPITE OF THE HANDICAP, I had to grab her ROYAL HIGHNESS
and skip; but THE DANGER MARK is passed, an' we'll soon have POLLY
PEACHUM, IN CHAINS, aboard our merry captain's leaky OLD CIDER MILL:
grind your engine, LADDIE, and get away from this DESERTED VILLAGE, for
this may be a ZEPPELIN NIGHT, an' you know only innocent people, like
ourselves, are killed on those nights, an' don't get twisted up in your
untied SHOESTRINGS, an' don't SOUND your horn."

And THE MAN AT THE WHEEL soon had the motor ON SIXTH SPEED, rushing in
FULL SWING, along THE ROMANTIC ROAD.




VI: INTRODUCES THE HEROINE.


The Brighton EXPRESS, having arrived at WATERLOO, some FORTY MINUTES
LATE, the Duke and his newly-made DUCHESS at once proceeded to HIS WIFE,
Celeste's APARTMENT in THE HOUSE IN SPRING GARDENS, where dinner awaited
them.

"SWEETHEART," said the Duke, "you look a DREAM in that COSTUME; to-day a
DUCHESS OF FEW CLOTHES, TO-MORROW, of many: do you know, I feel we are
like THE CHILDREN WHO RAN AWAY: I really don't deserve all this
HAPPINESS: WHEN A MAN MARRIES or the woman goes IN SEARCH OF A HUSBAND,
they naturally have GREAT EXPECTATIONS for a HAPPY LIFE, and I know we
are not going to be disappointed."

"And I am going to be a SUCCESSFUL WIFE," said the Duchess.

"But to RETURN to our talk about your parents: I must find this so-called
NURSE NORAH; I am convinced that you are not the DAUGHTER of Anderson
Crow."

"Of course I'm not, JACK, but whose daughter am I? I am IN THE DARK; when
JUST A LITTLE GIRL, I was sent to school at STRATFORD-ON-AVON where on
SATURDAY MORNINGS, I was visited by a woman who called herself MY AUNT
JEANNETTE, and spoke of me as A DAUGHTER OF THE RICH; MY SCHOOL LIFE
taught me THE VALUE OF COURAGE, but played HAVOC with my disposition: the
HOUR OF CONFLICT had to come, of course: and then DIMBIE AND I ran away
to TOWN and I soon became one of THE PLAYERS O'LONDON, and you know the
REST."

"I shall certainly see YARBOROUGH THE PREMIER: he is familiar with LONDON
of twenty...."

"His Grace is wanted on the TELEPHONE," said the maid.

"Yes: Jameson: NO: very well: GREAT CATHERINE: very well."

"I must leave you for a while, my dear; SANDY wants to see me and
Inspector Morgan is coming to my chambers; Jameson says something
important: ALL ABOUT ME: JUST FANCY: so GOOD BYE SWEETHEART, you are
going to be A JOY FOREVER, and these are going to be GREAT DAYS for us;
LIFE IS A DREAM really."

After leaving SPRING Gardens, the Duke, who did not consider WALKING A
FINE ART, proceeded slowly along KENSINGTON road, ON THE LOOKOUT for
FAMILIAR FACES, and at THE STREET CALLED STRAIGHT, was stopped by a sign
NO THOROUGHFARE, where a subway was under construction, and was accosted
by a bibulous INDIVIDUAL, who had just waded through a mortar box, and
who said:

"Greash Scott: ole BOY" said THE MAN WITH THE IRON SHOES, swinging his
GOLD HEADED CANE, "who'd thought--hic--it'd snowed so hard in thish one
spot: Sir: wantchew t'know, I'm fren' of Sir Jaff'y Gotdough: an' he's
dead."

The Duke had proceeded as far as Addison Road station, when a hansom
pulled up towards him, and he immediately recognized the occupant as his
cousin the Lady Evelyn, who said--

"Jack: I've been watching for you: Jameson said you were in SPRING
Gardens, but preferred not to give the number: said it was NORTH OF
FIFTY-THREE: jump in, please; I know it is not GOOD FORM FOR WOMEN to be
driving ALONE in a public vehicle, and I feel like one of THE GIRL ROUGH
RIDERS."

"Well; MY LADY CAPRICE, I WAS THINKING OF YOU; what's on HER LADYSHIP'S
CONSCIENCE?"

"Jack: I want this to be A CHRONICLE OF FRIENDSHIPS: I know you will ask
BY WHAT AUTHORITY, am I interesting myself in your affairs, but do let us
be COMRADES, let me tell you that the Major has been telling me about
your FRIEND, THE CHORUS LADY, THE IDOL OF THE TOWN, as she is called--now
keep your temper--please, only nice things to say--I AM convinced that
she is a lovely and remarkable girl, and not a mere FLUFFY RUFFLES: the
Major says she is not the daughter of THE ADVENTURER, Crow."

"But, my dear EVELYN, you of all others; you are THE ONE WOMAN to
interest yourself: it is amazing."

"No sarcasm, JACK, you know I care lots for you, FOR SUCH IS LIFE, and if
you really want to marry the girl, you may count on me: but I came to
tell you, that ONE DAY, some time ago, ON OUR STREET, my motor ran down a
WOMAN; of course you will say the INEVITABLE, WOMAN IN THE WAY, and
thinking her only stunned ordered her carried into the HOUSE, and called
THE DOCTOR, and after an examination, DR. DAVID ordered absolute quiet
and forbade her immediate removal: for three days, the woman raved about
THE MALEFACTOR, Celeste, Cammerleigh, Crow, and THE FRUIT OF THE TREE:
ordinarily, one does not give these ravings a second thought for
delirious persons seem to have A PERFECT PASSION for raving ON ANYTHING,
but the things next to their HEART, but the names struck me very
forcibly; is it not curious THE WAY THINGS HAPPEN; NIGHT AND MORNING,
from NINE UNTIL SIX-THIRTY, she kept it up: I think, at the time of the
accident, the WOMAN was being followed, as Denis has seen the same man
watching THE HOUSE: the woman finally recovered and upon being
interrogated, admitted that she expected to need a large sum of MONEY,
and asked if I would be willing to give two thousand pounds for her
SECRET: of course I agreed, with a string attached, meaning of course,
that being a woman, you have a perfect right to change YOUR MIND,
whereupon, she said that when I receive a box containing a red lily, I
must at once visit the PRINCESS Dehra: TO-MORROW, I shall tell you what I
have discovered at the PRINCESS Dehra's."

"Truly, EVELYN, you're a wonder: I believe you are going to help this
LITTLE DUKE, as you helped LITTLE ROB ROBIN: the deed has been done, I
have paid THE PRICE OF LOVE: I was MARRIED at BRIGHTON this morning."

"I am very glad, JACK; and I WISH YOU JOY: I KNOW she is a dear girl....
By-the-bye, I am still undecided about becoming SIR JAFFRAY'S WIFE: I had
hoped to make something out of him, but...."

"About how much: a million?" forgetting, for the moment, that he had just
heard of the death of this unfortunate individual.

"Sarcastic again, Jack: but here we are at Brook street: driver: No.
SEVENTEEN Grosvenor square: Good-night, Jack; come to see me TO-MORROW,
and trust to my JUDGMENT."




VII: THE CRISIS.


"HELLO! Sandy, OLD MAN: how are you? is THE LURE OF THE CITY too much for
you? take that chair, please."

"Thanks: I really would not know what to do with it."

"Same old joker, I see: but tell me about THE MARRIAGE OF THEODORA: when
I heard of THE SUICIDE of her UNCLE WILLIAM.... By-the-bye, WHY DID HE DO
IT?"

"Well: I suppose THE UNFORSEEN happened, and, I dare say, he feared BARON
TRIGAULT'S VENGEANCE and moreover, I fancy he could not have stood THE
TEST of the probable revelations of RAILWAY MISRULE: SO THEY WERE
MARRIED, not AT THE VILLA ROSE, but at THE HOUSE OF SERRAVALLE, you know
THE RED-HOUSE ON ROWAN STREET, on THE UP GRADE from WOODSTOCK, on THE
SUNNY SIDE OF THE HILL: THEODORA'S HUSBAND, MR. OPP, is, by LONG ODDS,
the nicest chap I have met in years: of course, it was a MARRIAGE A LA
MODE, as he has inherited the greater portion of JOHN MARSH'S MILLIONS,
and he has undertaken THE EDUCATION OF JACQUELINE, THE RED HEAD, you
know: rather AN EMBARRASSING ORPHAN, but a jolly keen one, just the same:
knows about THREE HUNDRED THINGS A BRIGHT GIRL CAN DO, and she will be A
SUCCESS IN LIFE: but of all the FAIRIES I HAVE MET...."

"Inspector Morgan, your Grace," announces Jameson.

"Sorry, Sandy, I'll see you later. Morgan, I've been AN EXILE FROM LONDON
for one whole day: what's the news?"

"I thought your Grace would like to be in at THE ROUND-UP to-night, as I
believe you will have some personal interest in the case: I have not all
the ends joined: there are a few FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN unattached, but it
is only a question of getting UNDER THE CRUST: but before I forget it;
the DOVER incident is closed: THE PASSENGER FROM CALAIS has been CAPTURED
and THE CAREER OF KATHERINE BUSH has been brought to a close: always hate
to run down THE WEAKER SEX, but QUICK ACTION was necessary. We are going
to Ratcliffe, your Grace, and I have The Yard's Rolls-Royce below, and if
you have no objection, we'll make a start. I have taken the PRECAUTION to
bring THE SCARLET RUNNER, as we call it; pretty heavy car, but greater
SECURITY; LIGHT MOTOR CARS AND VOITURETTES are no good for rough roads."

"JERRY," said Morgan, as they reached the curb, "GO-AHEAD, don't be a
'FRAID CAT, High street, Ratcliffe."

It took but a moment to get FROM LOW TO HIGH GEAR: through Hobart Place,
into VICTORIA Street, across New Palace Yard, and on to the Embankment.

"Give this motor HALF A CHANCE," said Morgan, "and you are GOING SOME:
Does your Grace see the man AT THE CROSS ROADS? that's MY FRIEND
PROSPERO: he has been connected with more CELEBRATED CRIMES than any man
at the Yard."

On HIGH SPEED, THE SCARLET CAR rushed past The Metropole, under Charing
Cross bridge, past The Needle and the imposing facade of SOMERSET HOUSE:
across Blackfriars entrance, and then into EARLY LONDON. "BREAKERS
AHEAD," called Morgan, "Jerry: careful of the mud." There really wasn't
any mud, only CITY DUST, but the sentence had to be interpolated here in
order to give a REASON for the next question.

"I don't suppose your Grace is interested in ROAD MATERIALS? Last year,
MY SON AND I made A STUDY OF SPLASHES."

The motor continued on its CROOKED WAY through Upper and Lower THAMES
streets, past THE TOWER OF LONDON, over THE BROKEN ROAD of Lower
Shadwell.

"Your Grace, I venture to say, A BIT OF ROUGH ROAD."

"Very, Morgan, but good for OUR DIGESTION, but THESE SHIFTING SCENES are
rather disconcerting."

The motor was stopped at Love Lane, where the party was met by POLICEMAN
BLUE JAY, who accompanied them to the THAMES Wharf, BEYOND the No. 3
shaft of Rotherhithe Tunnel.

"Inspector," said THE PILOT, "here's A STROKE OF LUCK; this is no WILD
GOOSE CHASE; your trip is not IN VAIN; you're JUST IN TIME, for the boat
is still at ANCHOR."

"WHAT SHALL WE DO NOW?" asked the Duke, not KNOWING, OTHER PEOPLE'S
BUSINESS.

And Morgan, pointing through THE PURPLE MISTS, to the SURREY side, for
the early DAWN was upon them, said:

"We have now reached THE END OF THE JOURNEY: do you see the ship in
MIDSTREAM off the Surrey Locks, in front of the gas tanks? That's our
destination: the DEAR ENEMY."

"But, Morgan, for THE LIFE OF ME, I fail to see where I come in."

"All in good time, your Grace: IT'S ALL IN A DAY'S WORK: again I say,
don't WORRY: but I see the EBB-TIDE is on," and blowing two blasts upon a
whistle, the Police-Boat, THE SEAWOLF, shot through THE OUTLET from
Shadwell Basin, where she was always HELD FOR ORDERS.

"Be careful, your Grace: get away, ANTONIO: THE BLACK BARQUE, you know:
and when we get aboard, all be careful of the OPEN HATCHWAYS."

And IN ANOTHER MOMENT, Morgan, standing in the bow, shouted "Ship Ahoy:
IN THE KING'S NAME, I want the captain of THE QUEEN OF THE NIGHT," after
which they began climbing UP THE LADDER.

(A fight occurs here, a description of which has been omitted as it
contains some BLANKETY BLANK VERSE.)

"And now, my worthy CAP'N GID, cut out the SMILES: THE GAME is up: the
POPULATION of your HAPPY SHIP has dropped one; we have secured two
prisoners and if you don't want to be the third, COME down, and besides,
BY WHAT AUTHORITY are you SAILING, UNDER TWO FLAGS: IN SPITE OF ALL the
WHITE LIES you have told us, you have A YOUNG LADY aboard and we propose
to have THE GIRL: WORDS TO THE WISE, you know. I admit that you have been
A VICTIM OF VILLAINY, but you are playing A DESPERATE GAME, and THE
RECKONING is at hand. Where is THE HIDDEN VICTIM? what, may I ask, have
you over there IN GRANDMA'S CHEST, there in THE SHADOW, UNDER THE RED
ROBE? Put down that gun: anyway I can see it is not THE REAL THING."

(A fight occurs here, a description of which has been omitted, as there
was some PISTOL AND REVOLVER SHOOTING.)

"My CAPTAIN with the FAIRY TALES, THE CONFLICT is over; THE DAY'S WORK is
finished; as a FIGHTER, you're a monumental failure: go buy a scrap-book,
and learn how to become a prize-fighter, and as to SHOOTING FIRE-ARMS
like WILD FIRE, it was simply FURTHER FOOLISHNESS; but FOR THE LOVE OF
TONITA, come off your PIRATE BRIDGE; pull up, and remember IT IS NEVER
TOO LATE TO MEND: no more MONKEY SHINES: this HAPPY-GO-LUCKY business has
been EASY MONEY to you, you with THE ITCHING PALM; but it is really not
one of the THINGS WORTH DOING, and IT NEVER CAN HAPPEN AGAIN: I PROMISE
to let you off, and these are no IDLE WORDS, for you have been THE DUPE,
and I WISH YOU JOY in your FREEDOM, but OH! MARY BE CAREFUL, hereafter.
And NOW, my MAN, draw up at the ROYAL ALBERT Dock."

       *       *       *       *       *

"EXCUSE ME, MY LORD DUKE," said Morgan, "I think instead of awaiting the
return of the motor, THE MORE EXCELLENT WAY will be to begin THE HOMEWARD
JOURNEY, by taking a tram here for West Ham, and then the District to THE
WEST END, THE LAND OF MAKE BELIEVE."

"GO-AHEAD BOYS: FOLLOW ME, your Grace," and carrying the still LIMPY
figure of the RELEASED girl, the party crossed the road.




VIII: THE GRAND FINALE.


The Duke of Belleville had just finished going through his morning's
post, and still held in his HAND a lengthy letter from his financial
adviser, RICHARD ELLIOTT, FINANCIER, THE MONEY MASTER dealing with THE
FINANCES OF SIR JOHN KYNNERSLY, one of THE BOOMERS of the day, and with
THE CONTEST FOR SOUND MONEY. The Duke was, at the moment, reclining
rather lazily, with his TWO LEGS outstretched, and was thinking, neither
of the contents of THE LETTERS, nor of WHAT TO WEAR, but listening
rather, as THE MUSIC LOVER, to THE SONG OF SONGS, THE SONG OF THE
CARDINAL, perched upon THE ELM TREE ON THE MALL.

Oh! What is there to equal a SPRING IN LONDON?

This, the Duke's favorite room, was at once the admiration of the
artistic, containing, as it did, wonderful examples of THE CHIPPENDALES,
and FRAGMENTS OF OLD FURNITURE, collected by HIS OWN PEOPLE, his very own
ANCESTORS: the room, too, was an historic one; many A PRINCESS OF
INTRIGUE had occupied that very chair, and the GHOSTS OF PICCADILLY had
met there on more than one occasion, for every house must have a GHOST,
even if it be JUST FOR FUN.

THE BRONZE BELL of distant Big Ben had just proclaimed the hour of noon,
when Inspector Morgan was announced.

"AT LAST," said the Duke to himself, "THE REVELATIONS OF INSPECTOR
MORGAN."

"THE TOP OF THE MORNING to your Grace: I am here, as you see, AT THE TIME
APPOINTED: I trust your Grace is well, after the ORDEAL BY FIRE last
night? I am A COURIER OF FORTUNE. RECORD NO. 33 is now complete."

"I AM WELL, Morgan: but out with THE GREAT SECRET: I take it that THE
WELDING of the chain is complete: that THE GREAT PLAN has been
successful: but allow me to suggest that you are not FRANKS DUELLIST, so
for goodness sake, stop bending THE SILVER BLADE of that knife: it is not
a rapier, as you seem to imagine, and I am afraid you will break it: it
really belongs IN THE KITCHEN."

"MY STORY, your Grace, is rather long, and in a manner proves that there
has been MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING: but before I begin, let me say that Sir
Jaffray was FOUND DEAD this MORNING: of course it was DRINK that killed
him: I fancy that lets your cousin, HER LADYSHIP, out of a bad bargain:
THE MESSAGE, BY TELEPHONE from Broadstairs stated further that Sir
Jaffray and THREE COMRADES were BOXING and drinking quantities of BAD
WHISKEY at BAR-20 of THE FLYING INN, and a propos were discussing the
ART OF AVIATION, and FLIGHT WITHOUT FORMULAE, which only added FUEL to
THE FLAME, and became so noisy, that THE MASTER OF THE INN threw them
OUTDOORS: but to RETURN; this MORNING, I had a long INTERVIEW with Miss
Marjorie Crow, and she has helped me to BRIDGE, THE CHASM: LINK BY LINK,
have I welded the chain: your Grace will probably recall that affair at
ELIZABETH, when Lord Cammerleigh, having been at THE OPERA with Lady
Grasmere, was found dead, two hours later, in High street, ELIZABETH; his
apparently lifeless body carried into THE RUNNING HORSE INN, to await the
arrival of the Coroner of THE 13th DISTRICT: how the body disappeared IN
A MYSTERIOUS WAY, after having been viewed by THE VEILED LADY: the NEXT
MORNING, one of the Yard's men, PENDENNIS, in passing along QUALITY
STREET, saw Lord Cammerleigh at THE WINDOW AT THE WHITE CAT: with the aid
of a FORCING BOOK, THE BOLTED DOOR was forced open and his Lordship, even
although AT BAY, denied having been at ELIZABETH: said he had been
MOTORING through the HIGHWAYS AND BYWAYS IN KENT. Nevertheless, he quite
innocently gave us THE CLUE: ONCE BITTEN TWICE SHY, you know; THE WOMAN
IN QUESTION was traced to CHIPPINGE BOROUGH, where we found she made A
CHANGE OF DRESS, and in the garb of a CHARITY sister, visited prisoner
NUMBER 99, at DARTMOOR: here, then, was THE MAN IN THE CASE, No. 99,
being none other than the celebrated DR. NIKOLA. FROM THE BOTTOM UP, by
DEVIOUS WAYS, by PERSUASION, and I might say, almost by FOUL-PLAY, have
we worked out this case: the WOMAN, I have no doubt, finally realized
that she was being HUNTED DOWN, for we took every OPPORTUNITY to let her
know that we had her under surveillance, but here our theory failed us,
THAT IS TO SAY, the woman, NO DOUBT realizing that she was UNDER FIRE,
instead of coming to US with a proposition, wrote a confession, then took
A FATAL DOSE of Coniine. Now, your Grace, I understand that you were
married yesterday, and you will recall that last night we rescued a young
girl, named MARJORIE Crow...."

"What! Morgan, you certainly don't mean SISTERS: but I know the Duchess
hasn't a sister."

"AS YOU LIKE IT, your Grace: right you are, her Grace is quite unaware of
the fact; but THE TURN OF THE BALANCE came this morning, when I informed
his Lordship about THE WOMAN AT KENSINGTON, HOW SHE PLAYED THE GAME: that
her husband was still alive and IN DURANCE VILE, although, as I SAID TO
MYSELF, this is not THE TRUTH as his RELEASE came last night. Lord
Cammerleigh then related his story: strange how all the FRAGMENTS should
be found at the same time: IN A NUTSHELL, the woman's CONFESSION is that
she and her sister were the nurses to his Lordship's two daughters...."

"It will be news to most people to hear of Cammerleigh as a FATHER," said
the Duke, "but continue."

"At this time his Lordship was very fond of the gaming-table and
thoroughly knew THE RULES OF THE GAME: one night, finding himself
cheated, knocked down the offender, AS A MATTER OF COURSE, and fled from
THE CLUB. AS IT HAPPENED, the man was not injured: continued his
prison-in-the-end career, and came into public notice TWO YEARS AGO, in
the case of THE FOURBE Soapstone and Leather Co. vs. THE GREAT AMERICAN
PIE COMPANY: was convicted and is now at DARTMOOR as No. 99, which is, as
I told you, NOT EXACTLY SO. The morning after the club affair, the WOMAN,
the nurse, informed Lord Cammerleigh that he had killed HER HUSBAND and
demanded twenty thousand pounds; to keep silent: for the moment, she knew
she had THE UPPER HAND: his Lordship thought HIS HOUR had come, but he
put up A GOOD FIGHT: but YOU NEVER KNOW YOUR LUCK, for the nurse did not
know that his Lordship only had a very small life-interest in his wife's
estate, and could not comply with her demands, her scheme had failed:
then she spirited away the infants, and it was not until to-day, that his
Lordship knew that they were still alive, so thoroughly did THE
BLACKMAILERS do their work."

"Why did he not call in the police: COWARD...."

"JUST A MINUTE, your Grace, the reason is obvious: he had the murder,
so-called, in mind, and he also hoped to locate the kids himself: for
eighteen years, he was HELD IN THE TOILS, until one day he saw the woman,
driving in a VICTORIA, in THE ENGADINE: she seemed to be moving IN HIGH
PLACES (ALTITUDE, 5935 ft.): he followed her and made A BID FOR FREEDOM,
but without SUCCESS: the WOMAN informed HIS LORDSHIP that the moment she
heard of his DEATH, she would reveal HER SECRET to his lawyers: hence the
two sham deaths: on both occasions, he had some one AT HAND, to
immediately come FORWARD to claim the body and spirit it away, so that
proper restoratives could at once be applied, without the aid of an
inquisitive medical MAN: Doctor Phaque thinks he must have used a powder,
composed chiefly of Dimethyloxyquinizine and Myosin to produce this
STATE: the same person was to at once inform the NEWSPAPERS of the death:
unfortunately, on the first occasion and ON THE EVE of SUCCESS, the
woman, having followed him to ELIZABETH, at once saw through the trick.
The second attempt proved equally disastrous: we had the details of the
Norton abduction, by arresting the man left behind, A WATCHER IN THE
WOODS; the woman had arranged THE GREAT PLAN, HERSELF, when she realized
that she had divulged entirely too much to Miss MARJORIE Crow but MAN
PROPOSES, you know: the Nikola man's real name is Anderson Nicholson
Crow. How is that for A STORY OF A LIE? Lord Cammerleigh is now with his
DAUGHTER, MARJORIE, and expects to call upon her Grace very shortly: he
really believes himself quite ill; I found him studying A TREATISE ON
APPENDICITIS, and he TALKS about being put UNDER THE KNIFE: A DIAGNOSIS
of his own, AS I REMEMBER; PEOPLE LIKE THAT are NOT EXACTLY RIGHT; they
get on my nerves; they should have PEACE AND QUIET behind THE FIVE BARRED
GATE."

"Oh! COME, Morgan, take THINGS AS THEY ARE: But your success has been
truly marvellous: HERE'S TO YOU: you deserve a big COMPENSATION, and A
TOY SHOP, FOR THE CHILDREN. Jameson, telephone THE SLEEPING CAR office
in Cockspur Street, to reserve rooms on THE ROME EXPRESS for to-morrow
night, as the Duchess and I want to get away from the TUMULT of THE
CROWDED STREET; and TO BE AMUSED: and now, Morgan, LAUGH AGAIN, and
GOOD-BYE."

       *       *       *       *       *

OF COURSE EVERYTHING HAS BEEN EXPLAINED, BUT NOBODY WILL UNDERSTAND THE
EXPLANATIONS ANY BETTER THAN THE AUTHOR UNDERSTOOD WHAT WAS SOUGHT TO BE
EXPLAINED.




Transcribers note:


Minor printing errors have been corrected without note, although
inconsistent punctuation and capitalisation has been left as per the
original.

The following is a list of notable changes made. The modified line is
shown first and the original line is shown second:

  to amuse himself by dictating to MISS MARJORIBANKS,
  to amuse himself by dictating to MISS MAJORIBANKS,

  to take his PETS to NORTHANGER ABBEY, to SERENADE
  to take his PETS to NORTHRANGER ABBEY, to SERENADE

  stealthily approached the couch, upon which the girl, Marjorie,
  steathily approached the couch, upon which the girl, Marjorie,

  shaft of Rotherhithe Tunnel
  shaft of Rotherhite Tunnel

The line "BOOK, THE BOLTED DOOR was forced open and his Lordship,"
was left as per the original although it should probably have started
with HOOK.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Peachmonk, by John Eyerman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PEACHMONK ***

***** This file should be named 40253.txt or 40253.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/2/5/40253/

Produced by Robert Cicconetti, Dave Hobart and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
