Project Gutenberg's The Baptist Magazine, Vol. 27, May 1835, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Baptist Magazine, Vol. 27, May 1835

Author: Various

Editor: George  Wightman

Release Date: July 18, 2012 [EBook #40252]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BAPTIST MAGAZINE, VOL. ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, Charlene Taylor and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)



Transcriber's note:

Due to the number of tables, this file reads better in a monospaced
font.






                                   THE
                             BAPTIST MAGAZINE.
                                MAY, 1835.




              MEMOIR OF THE LATE REV. R. MORRISON, D.D., &c.
                    _Missionary to the Chinese Empire._
                 BY AN INTIMATE FRIEND OF THE DECEASED.[A]


[Footnote A: A Sermon has just been published, entitled, "A Voice from
China; a Discourse, delivered at New Windsor Chapel, Salford, on Sunday,
February 11, 1835, to improve the lamented death of the Rev. Robert
Morrison, D.D., F.R.S., &c., &c.; with a Sketch of his Character and
Labours, principally compiled from his own correspondence. By John
Clunie, LL.D." Of this discourse we are happy to avail ourselves, for
the purpose of presenting our readers with a brief memorial of this
distinguished servant of Christ; still referring them to the Sermon
itself for some interesting extracts, and appropriate reflections, which
we are unable to transfer to our pages.--ED.]

The Rev. Dr. Morrison was born at Morpeth, Jan. 5, 1782, but was
early removed to Newcastle-upon-tyne. His parents, though in humble
circumstances, were industrious and pious members of the Scottish
church; and they educated their family in the fear of the Lord. When a
boy, he was, with other young persons of the congregation, frequently
catechised by the Minister; and this has inadvertently led to an
erroneous report, that he was originally a Sunday School scholar. He
was afterwards taught a mechanical trade, which he diligently followed
till he left home. I believe he "feared the Lord from his youth;" and
that the pious instructions of his father's house, and the faithful
ministrations of his pastor, were so blessed to him, that at the age of
sixteen he solemnly devoted himself to God. When engaged in his secular
calling, his mind, thirsting for knowledge, sought its own improvement,
first by general reading, and, after a few years, by diligently
acquiring the rudiments of Latin. He used to steal hours from rest, and
often to work with his book raised before him, so that his eye could
cast a rapid glance on its pages, while his hands were actively employed
at his daily labour. Thus he at once prepared his lesson for the
Minister who kindly instructed him, and discovered the first indications
of that diligence and talent for the acquisition of a foreign language,
which laid the basis of his future fame.

At this time, in consequence of his manifest love of study, and his
ardent desire for usefulness, his mother entertained many fears, that
she should soon be deprived of the object of her affections, by his
removal from her: but her fears, so far as she herself was concerned,
were groundless; for she was called to her rest, the year before he left
home for the Academy. Thus she neither felt the pain of his anticipated
absence, nor rejoiced in the participation of his subsequent honours.

On entering Hoxton Academy, January, 1803, I found that Mr. Morrison had
arrived a few days before me; and as we both regularly attended, with
our friends, the ministry of that eminent servant of God, the Rev. A.
(afterwards Dr.) Waugh, we were very soon intimately acquainted with
each other: the result was an indissoluble friendship of nearly
thirty-two years, during the whole of which period, we frequently
interchanged our joys and our sorrows, and reciprocated our
congratulations and our sympathies; while fidelity and affection
mutually tendered, when necessary, admonition and reproof. His character
was even then distinguished by those qualities which subsequently
rendered him so illustrious--the most ardent piety, indefatigable
diligence, and devoted zeal. His natural disposition was grave and
thoughtful; so that, as his mind was often the subject of anxious and
desponding views, especially of _himself and his attainments_, he
probably occasionally appeared to some as gloomy and melancholy. But
those who knew him best were fully convinced, that most of his anxieties
arose from his deep sense of the importance of the work for which he was
preparing, of his own utter incompetency for its faithful discharge, and
of the consequent obligation under which he was laid, to exert himself
to the utmost, to secure the _full benefit_ of every advantage placed
within his reach. Hence he was a most exemplary student, and always
aimed at distinction, even in some branches of study for which he
appeared very little adapted. But his chief reliance to secure success,
was not on any effort of his _own_, however diligently and constantly
exerted--but on the divine blessing. Hence few ever entered more fully
into the great Luther's favourite axiom, _to pray well is to study
well_; for of him it may be very justly said, that prayer was the
element in which his soul delighted to breathe.

His mind had long mourned over the deplorable state of the heathen
world, to which he wished to publish "the unsearchable riches of
Christ;" though he then knew not _how_ it could possibly be
accomplished. But after having attended two Missionary Anniversaries in
London, he saw the door effectually opened before him, and instantly
resolved to enter on the arduous task. The appeals of Thorpe, Bennet,
Dickson, and Scott, the commentator, at the last of these anniversaries,
were to him irresistible; and he "immediately conferred not with flesh
and blood," but consecrated himself to the work of the Lord among the
heathen, saying, _Here am I, send me_. No sooner, however, had he
signified his intention, than every objection was made, and every
difficulty thrown in his way; and when these failed, he was tempted by
favour and honour, to remain at home; but all proved equally in vain.
This opposition doubtless arose from a mistaken estimate of the superior
claims of home; as it was manifested by some of the "excellent of the
earth," who afterwards most cordially rejoiced in his success abroad.
Thus, while faithfully following his own convictions of duty, he not
only exhibited that decision of character which he ever displayed, but
eventually found the truth of that sacred declaration, "Them that
honour me I will honour; and they that despise me shall be lightly
esteemed."

After the usual examination, he was most cheerfully accepted by the
Missionary Society; and, having been affectionately commended to the
special grace of God, by his fellow-students, he left the Academy at
Hoxton for that at Gosport, to enjoy the missionary training of the
venerable Mr. (afterwards Dr.) Bogue. Few students ever left the house
more irreproachable in their conduct, or more generally respected, by
all, for their real worth, and unfeigned piety; or more beloved by those
who enjoyed the felicity of their faithful friendship. Though it was
little apprehended that he would so soon be called to fill one of the
most arduous and important spheres which could be conceived; or, that he
would ultimately rise to such an eminence in it, as to command the
admiration of all classes of the christian church, and of the community
in general; yet, it is impossible to reflect on his diligent and devoted
course at Hoxton, without clearly recognizing the _incipient elements_
of all his future success. Others, indeed, possessed more brilliant
talents,--a richer imagination, a more attractive delivery, or more
graceful manners,--but, I trust I may be permitted to say, that there
was _no one_ who more happily concentrated in himself the three elements
of moral greatness already enumerated--the most ardent piety,
indefatigable diligence, and devoted zeal in the best of all causes.

Thus devoted to the glory of God and the salvation of the heathen, he
reached Gosport. To show his feelings and sentiments at that important
crisis, I shall quote his own words, from the first letter I ever
received from him, dated Gosport, June 9, 1804:

     "Dear ----, I expect that my brother would inform you of my safe
     arrival at Gosport, on the evening of the day I left you. Through
     the good hand of God upon me, in answer to the prayers of my
     relatives and Christian friends, I am yet in comfortable
     circumstances, and enjoy something of the presence of God, and of
     the hope of glory."

     "My dear brother, I hope the conversation we had when we travelled
     together to Leatherhead, will not soon be forgotten by you or me.
     Let the sentiment dwell upon our hearts, that it is the great
     business of our lives, to testify the gospel of the grace of God.
     Whether or not you and I have the happiness to labour together, as
     it respects place, we shall, I trust, have the happiness of
     pursuing the same end, seeking to promote the glory of God, the
     Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, in the salvation of men. O that this
     may be in truth our constant pursuit; so shall we have the
     happiness of God's approbation through life--at the hour of
     death--in the day of judgment--and be perfectly happy in his
     immediate presence through eternity."

And again, July 31st, he thus writes:

     "My situation at Gosport is agreeable, and the persons with whom I
     am connected are kind to me. The Lord, who gives me favour in their
     eyes, continues me in health. My mind is comfortable, and resigned
     to the Lord's pleasure concerning me. I, as formerly, have to
     'fight with sins, and doubts, and fears.' Such, I expect, will be
     my experience while I continue in this world."

     "My future destination is altogether unknown to me. It is in
     agitation to send a Mission to China. Mr. Bogue seems quite fond of
     it. I have had some thoughts about going into the interior of
     Africa, to Tombuctoo. I give up my concerns to the Lord. I hope he
     will open a door of useful missionary labour, in some part of the
     world, and give me souls for my hire."

With such feelings, he said "he would have gone to _any_ quarter of the
globe, where the people were as yet without a Divine Revelation." But
China, most happily, was the sphere allotted to him by the Directors of
the Missionary Society. To that immense empire their attention had been
directed by their first devoted Treasurer, Mr. Hardcastle, who judged it
highly important to attempt the acquisition of its difficult language,
and the translation of the Scriptures by some competent Missionary.
This, be it remarked, was at a time when it was quite uncertain, whether
any Briton would be allowed to go thither from England, or permitted to
reside even on the borders of China, if he should be able to reach its
shores. So strong then were the prejudices, in certain quarters, against
attempting to evangelize the East, that the Directors for a time avoided
the use of the term _Chinese Mission_; and actually were obliged to send
Dr. Morrison and others round by way of America. For this station,
China, he was eminently adapted: as it was well remarked by the lamented
Dr. Milne, that "talents rather of the _solid_ than the _showy_ kind,
rather I adapted to accomplish important objects by a course of
persevering labour, than to astonish by any sudden burst of genius, were
the most proper for the first Missionary to China: and such exactly were
the talents which the Giver of every good and perfect gift had conferred
on him." But it was thought highly desirable that he should have a
fellow-labourer, though subsequent events proved that this would _then_
have been quite impracticable in China. But every effort was made,
especially by himself, to prevail on some kindred soul to accompany him.
And here I must be excused slightly touching on one who was more than
half-disposed to respond to the call; but who was ultimately prevented,
by what appeared to him _imperative duty at home_. But he trusts his
heart was ever with him: and whatever sympathy and encouragement might
be, at any time, in his power to command, were most cheerfully rendered,
and the act considered as his highest honour.

What views Dr. M. entertained both of the missionary and ministerial
character, will best appear from what he desired for himself and his
friend. In a letter dated March 24, 1805, he thus writes:--

     "I pray God that he may pour into my soul, in rich abundance, the
     daily washing of regeneration and the renewing of the Holy Ghost.
     The gifts of the Holy Spirit, my brother, are radical
     qualifications in a minister, and in a missionary. Oh that you and
     I may be blessed with large measures of them! Let us keep in sight,
     my brother, our obligations to God our Saviour, who has redeemed us
     from the lowest hell; the short term of service; and the ineffably
     glorious reward of grace, in the kingdom of heaven; and, animated
     by the prospect, let us 'spend and be spent' for the sake of our
     Lord Jesus. Beloved, I wish that thou mayest prosper and be in
     health, even as thy soul prospereth. Pray God to make me a good man
     and a good missionary."

And again, May 30:--

     "Attend, my dear brother, very particularly, to the state of your
     own soul. Instead of saying, _pray much_, as I was just about to
     say, be very careful that your prayers be spiritual--from the
     heart: live by faith on Jesus Christ. I would add, I mean examine
     yourself much on this point; for there is much danger of our--those
     of us whose concern it is constantly to attend to religious
     matters--I say there is much danger of our doing things, praying,
     and exhorting, and reading, &c., as matters of course, without
     entering into them spiritually and seriously. Allow me to say--not
     because I am your master, but because I love you--study gravity,
     humility, and benevolence of deportment. Consider we profess to be
     the messengers of Jesus Christ to the children of God, and to
     sinful, guilty man: let us always be grave and serious. You and I
     are young, and know but little; let us be humble, considering
     others better than ourselves. We are the followers of Christ, and
     therefore should wish well to all, ever pleasing them for their
     good to edification."

After spending about fifteen months at Gosport, he came to London,
to obtain some knowledge of medicine, and to study the elements of
astronomy at the Observatory, Greenwich; from a misapprehension that
these, especially the last, would be essential to his success in China.
But however much they tended to expand his own mind, they were
subsequently found almost superfluous in practice: nevertheless, another
object was obtained by his residence for nearly eighteen months in the
metropolis. An amiable Chinese was found willing to reside with him, to
assist him a little in the acquisition of the language, and in
transcribing a Chinese Harmony of the Gospels in the British Museum, and
a Latino-Chinese Dictionary, borrowed from the Royal Society, both
composed by some unknown Roman Catholic missionaries. It was with
reference to him, while employed on the former, that an eminent
individual afterwards remarked, that he then little thought, as he
passed through the Museum, that _that_ stripling sitting at the table
transcribing an unknown tongue, would one day translate the Scriptures
into Chinese! Well may we exclaim, "Who hath despised the day of small
things?"--"Man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh
on the heart."

When the time of his departure from his native shores drew nigh, as I
was then at the University of Glasgow, he thus took his affectionate
leave of me by letter, January, 1807--

     "The period, my dear brother, has new arrived when I must bid an
     affectionate, and perhaps a last farewell. On Thursday evening I
     was solemnly ordained to the ministry of the gospel of the Lord
     Jesus Christ among the heathen. The service was at Swallow Street.
     Rev. John Townsend opened by prayer and reading the Scriptures.
     Rev. G. Burder asked the questions. Mr. Waugh offered up the
     ordination prayer. Mr. Nicol gave a charge, and Mr. Buck closed the
     service by prayer. It was a very solemn and impressive opportunity.
     Messrs. Gordon and Lee were ordained with me. We proceed on the
     24th inst. in the Remittance, Captain Law, to New York; from thence
     they take a ship to India, in all probability to Madras; whilst I
     alone, in another vessel, sail for Canton. If permitted, I intend
     to reside there; if not, I shall probably return to Malacca. Such,
     at present, my dear ----, are my external circumstances and
     prospects. With regard to success, I am not sanguine, nor am I
     depressed. I hope--_I believe_ I may safely take the comfort of our
     Lord's words, 'Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the
     world;' and, with this persuasion, what have I to fear? If Christ
     be with me, who can be against me? Let me, my brother, have
     occasionally an interest in your fervent prayers. Pray that I may
     not think it hard, if I fare as well as my Master! Farewell, my
     dear young brother; the God of peace be with you! My love to my
     dear brother Hooper."

Thus inspired, he departed for China, _instructed_ by the Directors to
learn its difficult language, and, if possible, compose a dictionary of
it, and, above all, to translate the Scriptures into a language
understood by a third part of the human race; and _counselled_ by a
beautiful letter, officially signed, but evidently composed by my
venerable father, Dr. Waugh. At New York he was very kindly received,
and obtained a letter of introduction from Mr. Maddison, then secretary
of state, to the American consul at Canton, which proved highly
beneficial to him there.

He reached China, Sept. 4, 1807, after a speedy but rough passage and,
being a perfect stranger, he landed at Macao, with the mate of the
ship, who left him next day. He was soon known to be a missionary, and
became the object of suspicion to the Roman Catholic clergy there.
During that season at Canton, he lived in a cellar, in the most retired
manner, and laboured incessantly at the language, with very little
success, compared with what his subsequent efforts attained; for he then
had only an _ignoramus_ for his tutor. But hear himself from Canton,
Sept. 14th, addressed to my own beloved mother:--

     "I daily converse with Chinese, but dare not so much as hint that
     I desire to stay here, or what my intention for coming is. Little
     merchants and tradesmen daily come to me, to know what I have got
     to sell, or what I wish to buy. I come to vend the pearl of great
     value, yet without asking money or price; but dare not tell my
     errand. I know that you will descend to the grave, praying for the
     success of your son in the faith of Jesus."

He subsequently resided in the factory of some American agents at
Canton, who showed him great kindness, and promoted his views to the
utmost of their ability. At first he conformed to the Chinese manners,
both as to eating and dress, from an erroneous idea that this would
recommend him to their kind notice; but when he discovered his error,
he resumed the manners of a European. But so anxious was he to learn
Chinese, that he prayed even in secret in it, when he was but very
imperfectly acquainted with its idioms. He quite secluded himself from
society for months, till his health began to suffer; and the first time
he ventured out into the fields was in a moonlight night, under the
escort of two Chinese.

In the beginning of 1809, he married Miss Morton, the eldest daughter of
a medical gentleman there; and, accepted an appointment in the Company's
factory, as Chinese translator, which unquestionably facilitated his
perfect acquisition of the language, and added much to his domestic
comfort. Such diligence and perseverance could not fail of success. From
Macao, December 28, 1810, he thus writes:--

     "I believe I was in Canton when I last wrote to you, via., the
     beginning of this year. I continued there till March, carrying on a
     discussion with the Chinese government respecting the alleged
     murder of a Chinaman. I obtained great eclat, by the public
     examination of witnesses. Every body was astonished, that in two
     years I should be able to write the language, and converse in the
     Mandarin and vulgar dialects. In consequence of that, three of the
     Company's servants determined to begin the study of Chinese; and I
     have during the summer been a regular Chinese tutor. I pray that
     the Lord may soon grant to me some from among the heathen, who will
     faithfully join in the promulgation of divine truth. I wish you had
     come with me to China: I want some humble, persevering
     fellow-labourer."

He regularly spent six months alternately at Macao and Canton, in
compliance with the requisition of the Chinese policy, whose jealousy
permits few foreigners to reside in the "celestial empire," as they
proudly denominate it; but which, in consideration of an annual revenue,
tolerates the Portuguese settlement on the insignificant island of
Macao.

In a letter dated December 29, 1811, he states:--

     "Sir George Staunton, who is very friendly to me, leaves the
     Company's service this year; and I am appointed to his place, as
     Chinese Secretary. This will confine me in Canton six months of the
     year. The Missionary Society judge it proper that I should be in
     this employment. It is far from being congenial with my taste or
     wishes, considered in itself. I greatly prefer entire devotedness
     to my missionary labours, and the perfecting, for future
     missionaries, a dictionary of the language."

This appointment, however, greatly increased his comforts and influence,
and enabled him to perform some of those noble acts of Christian
benevolence to be hereafter noticed.

About this time, though he had before been turned out of a miserable
house, because its owner said he had converted it into a chapel, he
commenced his exercises on the Lord's-day, by reading the "Harmony of
the Gospels;" and afterwards continued it, by exhorting a few Chinese
who attended, principally from his own household. These humble efforts
were rendered, under the Divine blessing, the means of enlightening and
converting several who are now actively engaged in the dissemination of
Christian knowledge among their pagan countrymen. In 1810, he tried the
practicability of printing the Scriptures, by revising and publishing
the Acts of the Apostles, which he had brought out with him; for
printing which he had paid the large sum of a dollar per copy--the price
at which the whole New Testament has since been published--on account of
the personal risk which those who engaged in it were supposed to run.
Yet he was encouraged; and next year he finished his Grammar, and sent
it to the press at Serampore, where the East India Company afterwards
honourably defrayed the expense of its publication. About the same time
he published his own translation of Luke's Gospel, and a tract which the
Missionary Society had requested him to write, on "The Redemption of the
World," and a catechism for the use of the Chinese. Thus he proceeded,
step by step, till, in 1813, he finished his translation of the New
Testament, having thus successfully toiled six years alone at the most
difficult language on earth, and done what was quite enough to
immortalize his name. The whole expense of the mission and translation
had hitherto been borne by the Missionary Society; but about this time,
on the presentation of a copy, first of one of the Epistles, and then of
Luke's Gospel, translated into Chinese, the British and Foreign Bible
Society twice voted L500. And soon after, on the presentation of the
whole New Testament, they voted the noble sum of L1000; and this was
subsequently munificently repeated, at different times, till, on the
completion of the whole Bible, it amounted to the princely sum of L5000,
without which, the work of translating the entire Scriptures would,
probably, not have been accomplished.

Just before this, Mr. Milne rejoiced his heart and strengthened his
hands by coming out from England and joining the mission; and having
commenced under _very_ different circumstances, he soon acquired the
language, and greatly assisted Dr. M. in his subsequent translations and
labours. But the jealousy of the Portuguese very soon drove Mr. Milne
from his embrace, and obliged him to retire, first to Canton, and then
to Malacca. This, however, eventually turned out for the furtherance of
the gospel, by the establishment of the Malayan mission, and thus
preparing the way for the establishment of the Anglo-Chinese College
there, for the instruction of Chinese youths in the principles of
Christianity and the cultivation of Chinese literature in general,
which, by the numerous publications that have issued from its press,
has proved of incalculable value to the populous nations around.
From Canton, December 19, 1812, he thus writes:--

     "The Chinese receive with much readiness the books which I
     distribute among them. I can give but few with my own hands, as I
     am not admitted to the interior; nor could I give them openly in
     the streets. The method which I take is, to give them to the
     booksellers, who will not destroy them, but be induced to put them
     into the hands of persons, for the sake of what they can make by
     them."

In 1814, he happily completed the first part of his Chinese dictionary;
and the whole work was generously published at the expense of the East
India Company, in three thick quarto volumes. It was the first ever
published in the English language; and it must remain a lasting memorial
of his astonishing diligence.

In 1816, he went as interpreter with our ambassador, Lord Amherst, to
the imperial court of Pekin; and subsequently published an account of
that unsuccessful embassy. He founded the Anglo-Chinese College, already
mentioned, in 1818, and liberally presented L1000 for its establishment,
and L100 per annum, for five years from its actual commencement. In
1819, he completed the translation of the whole Bible, having been
assisted in several parts of the Old Testament by his late excellent
colleague, Dr. Milne. With great propriety he once observed in
conversation, "_I could have died_, when I had finished the Bible."--On
that memorable day he wrote a long memoir, in which he described the
principles which he had adopted, and the plan which he had pursued, in
its execution; and concluded thus:

     "To have Moses, David, and the prophets--Jesus Christ and his
     apostles--declaring to the inhabitants of China, in their own
     language, the wonderful works of God, indicates, I hope, the speedy
     introduction of a happier era, in these parts of the world; and I
     trust that the gloomy darkness of pagan scepticism will be
     dispelled by the _day-spring from on high_; and the gilded idols of
     Budh, and the numberless images which fill this land, will one day
     assuredly fall to the ground, before the force of God's word, as
     the idol Dagon fell before the ark.

It is painful to observe here, that during a considerable portion of his
unwearied labours, he was visited by the heaviest afflictions. His own
health suffered exceedingly at different periods, under a most painful
disorder; his beloved wife also was, for several years, still more
grievously afflicted; and just before he had the happiness of finishing
his Bible, the wife of his colleague was early taken away, leaving four
fatherless children to mourn their unspeakable loss.

As Mrs. Morrison's complaint appeared to baffle the medical skill there,
and as it was quite impossible for Dr. Morrison to leave the sphere of
his important labours, she was obliged, in 1815, to visit England,
accompanied only by her two children. Having sojourned amongst us
several years, and finding herself greatly improved in health and
spirits, she returned with the same charge to China in 1820, to his
unspeakable delight. But the following year, she was suddenly removed,
after an illness of a few hours, and he was once more, and for ever
here, separated from "the wife of his youth." He had formerly lost his
first-born, on the very day it saw the light; and the Portuguese had
cruelly refused permission to inter the child of a heretic in their
consecrated ground. He was therefore obliged, under the shades of night,
to carry his own babe under his arm, attended only by a servant; and to
fee some of the Chinese, to let him pass the brow of a hill which was
behind his house; where he dug a grave, and buried his dead, purposing
in future an occasional visit to the interesting spot. And now he wished
to lay his beloved wife by the side of her babe; but the Chinese
threatened to oppose force, if he attempted it; and the Roman Catholics
were as inveterate as ever. But that kind Providence which had in so
many instances appeared for him, roused the indignation of the gentlemen
of the factory at Macao; and they subscribed and purchased a plot of
ground, just outside the walls, and devoted it as a perpetual Protestant
burial-ground. There he honourably buried her.

Next year, 1822, he was deprived of his able and beloved colleague, Dr.
Milne, who, on the 2nd of June, fell a sacrifice to his close and
unwearied application, and left the Anglo-Chinese College, of which he
was the Principal, the mission in general, and Dr. Morrison in
particular, to mourn his almost irreparable loss.

Having visited the College, and made every possible arrangement for its
present emergencies; and having some time before fully accomplished the
three great duties assigned him--either of which was almost enough for
any ordinary man--to learn the language, to translate the Bible, and to
compose a Dictionary, Dr. M. felt himself now at perfect liberty to
visit his native country, which he reached in the spring of 1824.

As Dr. Morrison had been so much and so deservedly anticipated by his
fame, an intense anxiety was every where manifested to see and hear him.
Hence he was expected to appear at every public meeting of the
Missionary and Bible Societies: and to preach on almost every occasion.
From the long prevalence of retired and studious habits, and I may add
of Asiatic manners, this was no easy or pleasant task for him; and it is
not wonderful, if, on some occasions, he disappointed the expectations
excited. But you, my Christian friends, can testify the powerful appeals
which he made here, and how much his soul was evidently inspired with
zeal for China; wherever he was, this was his ruling passion. Hence he
wished all _to love China_, and to seek her evangelization by every
means in their power; and not to mind silver or gold, friends or
comforts, except as they might become the honoured means of promoting
the Redeemer's kingdom. And it is highly gratifying to state, that his
visit was productive of considerable zeal and exertion on behalf of the
same. The greatest attention and kindness were every where shown him, by
all ranks of the community. He was honoured by being introduced at
court, where he presented to his Sovereign a copy of his Chinese Bible,
which was most graciously received, as was also a large Map of China,
which he subsequently transmitted. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal
Society, and of several other literary institutions, both at home and
abroad; and he had, some years before, in the most handsome manner, been
created Doctor in Divinity by the University of Glasgow, for his
distinguished labours. He prolonged his stay in England a second year,
in order to instruct some missionaries and others in Chinese; and to
promote the interests of Oriental literature, in connexion with
missionary efforts.

About this time, he again entered into the marriage state, by leading to
the altar Miss Armstrong, of Liverpool, well known to many of you: in
whose recent and unspeakable sorrows, I am fully convinced, you will
most deeply sympathize.

Having sent to the press his "_Parting Memorial_," he left, for the last
time, his native shores, with Mrs. Morrison, now his disconsolate widow,
and an infant, and his two elder children, in January, 1826, to return
to China, "the land of his adoption," as he called it; with the
intention of preparing a short Commentary on certain portions of the
Scriptures, and such other elementary Christian Essays as appeared
desirable for the right understanding of the word of God, now in
extensive circulation there. These works he was enabled, to a very
considerable extent, to accomplish before his decease.

But I must read you an extract from his last letter to myself, which I
received only eight days before his death, dated Macao, February 24,
1834:--

       "MY DEAR FRIEND,

     "Two days ago, your welcome letter, accompanied by a report of your
     kind Association for our poor college, arrived and afforded me much
     joy; for I had several months been wondering at your silence. The
     death of Milne and Collie, and the removal of Kidd and Tomlin, were
     impediments to the prosperity of the institution. But I am happy to
     say that, judging from Mr. Evans's letters from the College, he
     will soon restore it to all that piety, learning, and zeal can do
     for it. I have been depressed about it of late, but my hopes now
     revive.--The American missionaries in Canton are persevering in the
     good work, without any immediately great results. They are more
     zealously supported from America, than we are from England.--The
     church of Christ on earth, and also in heaven, is from all nations,
     and kindreds, and peoples, and tongues. It should know nothing of
     earthly nationalities. The kingdom under the whole heaven belongs
     to Christ, our blessed Saviour, of which I hope, my dear--we are
     citizens. I love the land of my descent, 'Canny Scotland;' the land
     of my birth, 'Old England;' and the land of my sojourn--my
     adoption, although not recognized by it--China. I would not set up
     one against the other. O that in point of fact (as in point of
     right they are) all the kingdoms of this world may soon become the
     kingdoms of our God and of his Christ! At present I am engaged on
     Notes on the Gospels, with marginal references in Chinese. My
     progress is but slow. My strength for labour has much diminished;
     and I have many calls on my time from various quarters. Adieu.

     "My dear brother and faithful friend, ever yours affectionately,

                                                     ROBERT MORRISON."

This was his last salutation: and the spirit of the whole is so truly
worthy of him, that to offer any comment would only be to weaken that
impression which I am convinced it has made so powerfully, as not soon
to be forgotten by many--for _he, being dead, yet speaketh_.

The particulars of Dr. M.'s lamented decease, were announced in the
Canton Gazette, and in an excellent letter from his son,[A] who long
worshipped with us here, to the Directors.

[Footnote A: An extract from this letter--supplying the melancholy part
of this memorial--will be found in our number for March, p. 107.--Ed.]

He expired at his residence in the Danish Hong, on the 1st of August,
1834. His remains were followed from thence to the river side by Lord
Napier,[B] and all the Europeans, Americans, and Asiatic British
subjects in Canton. The corpse was forwarded to Macao, and attended to
the grave by about forty European gentlemen, on Tuesday evening, August
5th, and interred in the private Protestant burial ground in that
settlement. The service of the church of England was read by the Rev.
Mr. Stevens, seaman's chaplain in the port of Canton, who was present at
his decease, and affectionately ministered to his comfort in that trying
hour.

[Footnote B: How singular, that he should so soon follow him to "the
house appointed for all living," and earnestly request to be buried near
him!]

Hear then the voice from _the tomb_: _Be ye also ready!_ His work of
faith and labour of love were ended. The day of Jubilee to Africa, was
the day of mourning to China! Then its first Protestant Missionary--its
first translator of the sacred volume--its devoted apostle--not to say,
he who unlocked the treasures of its literature to the western world,
was summoned to his glorious rest--his eternal reward! Then he was
hailed by the voice of his Saviour: "Well done, good and faithful
servant: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord:" while he joined the
chorus of the redeemed; "Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy
name give glory, for thy mercy and thy truth's sake." Only a month
before, the venerable Carey, the apostle of India, ascended to his
glory; and with what rapture must they have embraced each other, in the
presence of their common Lord!--But, if no talents, no zeal, no labours,
no usefulness, can elude the sentence of death--should not _we_ then
"prepare to meet our God?


                         THE CHRISTIAN ARMOUR.
                _To the Editor of the Baptist Magazine._

How admirable is the candour and frankness of Christianity! In other
systems and pursuits it is usual to conceal difficulties and dangers,
and to exhibit nothing, openly, but prospects of advantage. Not so the
Captain of our salvation, and those who had learned of him. They call
for self-denial, engage in a life of conflict, and glory in having the
cross to bear. Like an experienced general, the apostle, having rallied
his fellow-soldiers to the onset, reminds them that they had to contend
against no ordinary competitors: not against flesh and blood, (q. d.)
not against them _only_, or _chiefly_, but against beings who were
originally of a higher order, and _even now_, in their fallen state, are
powerful, crafty, and malignant. Whether we consider their nature, their
number, or employments, they are formidable adversaries to man.

_Their nature._ They are wicked spirits, who once were in the presence
and in the service of God; but "they kept not their first estate;"
having fallen by rebellion, and being reserved for the judgment of the
great day, they, like their prince, are "going about seeking whom they
may devour." Still they are angels that excel in strength, whose wisdom
is corrupted into cunning and craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive. Being _spirits_, they are invisible, and tempt without being
tired. Were they seen, they might be shunned: were they flesh and blood,
they might become weary in their work; but these "rulers of darkness"
have continued the work of wickedness ever since they were cast down
from the heavenly places.

Their _number_ also renders them a terror to the children of men; and
although under restraint, they are permitted to unite their counsels and
force against us. If, in the days of our Lord, seven had cutered the
person of _one_ unhappy sufferer, and _legions_ into _another_, we may
conclude the gross number greatly exceeds that of the human race.

The devil and his angels are represented as a king and his subjects;
whence we may infer that they act in concert, and that, whilst they sow
discord among men, there is an awful concentration of power and of
policy amongst themselves.

Their usurped _dominion_, and constant _employment_, are often referred
to in the holy Scriptures; and not an instance of extraordinary
degradation of character, of disaster of condition, but is traced to
the influence of the wicked one, who is emphatically called the "ruler
of the dark ages of this world." He blinds the mind--hardens the
heart--leads captive at his will--resists the prayers of the
saints--stifles the cry of the sinner--and (as in the case of Job) puts
forth a dreadful power by the destructive elements of nature: and were
it not for the restraints of divine Providence, and the operations of
grace, the history of man would be a record of continual crime, and
consequent misery.

We are here particularly admonished to "stand against the wiles of the
devil." Open violence might excite alarm, especially were it understood
from whence it proceeded; but secret stratagem has proved more
successful, both in drawing men into sin, and preventing their return
to God.

In presenting temptation, he diligently studies human character, and,
observing the weakest side, and waiting the unguarded moment, obtains
advantage over us without awakening suspicion.

Thus, in the case of Eve, the only thing she could desire in Paradise
was more knowledge; of Judas, more money; and of Ananias, more honour;
and for these objects, Satan, by his wily representation, induced the
first to eat the forbidden fruit; the second, to betray the Lord of
glory; and the third, to lie unto the Holy Ghost.

Hence the proud, the passionate, the polluted, the timid, and the
melancholy, are easily approached through the medium of some common
failing, or constitutional infirmity; and no one suspects that a devil
is near them, till the iniquity is committed: and the deed once done,
the tempter laughs at their calamity, and becomes their tormentor. The
same policy may be observed in the _seasons_ selected by him to ensnare
and overthrow the unwary. As a cunning adversary considers when the
troops are fatigued, scattered, asleep, or intoxicated; so the devil
assaulted the Saviour when alone, after fasting forty days, and just
before his crucifixion. As the pirate and the robber pass by and spare
the empty vessels, and the poor, but watch for those that return laden
with treasure; so this malignant foe resisted Joshua at the throne of
grace, sifted Peter as he descended from the mount, and sent his
messenger to buffet Paul when he had been caught up into the third
heavens. His wiles may be also seen in the _instruments_ employed: they
are such as have authority, influence, or reputation; so that a man's
deceiver shall be among his friends, "and his foes those of his own
house."

The artifice of this great adversary is not less manifest in _the
means employed to prevent our return to God_. Like a strong man armed,
he keeps his palace, and his goods are in peace; and to secure the
captive, he more frequently has recourse to fraud than to force, and
succeeds rather by stratagem than by strength.

To prevent alarm, he will suggest every mitigating circumstance
respecting their guilt; represent that it is an easy matter to repent
and obtain mercy at the last moment of life; or, if he cannot compose
the alarmed conscience with such opiates, he will change his course, and
represent their sins as peculiarly aggravated; their case as singular
and desperate; their day of grace as past; and that, having committed
the sin against the Holy Ghost, it is in vain for them to repent, or
expect forgiveness! Thus, from the pinnacle of presumption, he will
precipitate them into the gulf of despondency. Were it in his power to
prevent it, there would be no more joy in heaven at the repentance of a
sinner, and the light of hope, on earth, would be extinguished for ever.

Nor does he rest with having misrepresented the character and condition
of the sinner to himself; he will distort and conceal the true character
of God: at one time representing him as too merciful to punish any one
eternally for such faults as theirs; at another, that the insulted
Majesty of heaven meditates vengeance, and his holiness and justice
would be dishonoured if their multiplied and heinous offences were
forgiven; diverting their attention from the peculiar discoveries of the
gospel, he will, as in the conflict of our blessed Lord, bring the
Scriptures themselves to confirm his wicked suggestions, and, by a false
application of difficult and detached passages, hide from us the divine
perfections, as harmonizing and glorified in our redemption by Jesus
Christ.

One other stratagem may be mentioned, which, for the subtlety of its
nature, and the frequency of its use, requires especial notice. Satan
will often transform himself into an angel of light, and by means of
some popular minister, or talkative professor, promise a speedy growth
in divine life, but, in reality, will _divert from all proper thoughts
of God, and of themselves_. He will draw the young convert into some
matter of doubtful disputation, either of doctrine or discipline in the
church. He will either explode some important truth, or carry it into an
improper extreme, turning spirituality into mysticism, or liberty into
licentiousness. Having thus entangled the inexperienced in some
labyrinth of error, Satan cares not, if, under a profession of religion
he can but lead away from the simplicity that is in Christ; and
substitute for the spirit of the gospel a spirit of pride, and of
discord, in which all the angry passions find their element, and the
souls of men are lost for ever, amidst furious contentions about
religion. "Where-fore, take unto you the whole armour of God." Seeing
you are placed in circumstances that will require the faithful use of
every part of it, see that nothing be wanting to your steadfastness.

The armour is chiefly of the defensive kind, by which we may maintain
our standing in the Christian warfare.

There is an "helmet" for the head, a "breastplate" for the heart,
"shoes" (or greaves) for the feet, a "girdle" for the loins, a "shield"
that may be moved for the defence of every part that may require it, and
a "sword" by which deadly wounds may be inflicted on the enemy. Of these
we cannot now speak particularly, but shall hereafter, if God permit.

We close with three observations:--1. There is no preparation for the
back: hence we are to understand that we are to face the foe; and should
any think to flee for safety, they expose the unprotected part to the
enemy, and become an easy prey. 2. No direction is given for those who
shall use this armour aright, and yet be vanquished: from which we infer
that such a case cannot occur. This is an armour _of proof_, which never
has failed, and, if used in the strength of the Lord, is sure to be
effectual. Let the Christian army know that Satan, with all his power
and subtlety, shall never finally prevail against them. Thus armed,
_their head shall be preserved from error, their heart from iniquity,
and their feet from falling_. 3. This is expressly GOD's armour, and we
can receive it at the hands of no one but the Captain of our salvation.
As, when God decreed the destruction of Babylon, we are told that "the
Lord opened his armoury, and brought forth the weapons of his
indignation;" so, when Christians are called to fight the good fight, to
resist Satan, and overcome the world, a suitable armour is provided, and
we are directed to put it on, that we may war a good warfare,--

  "Till, crowned with victory, at his feet
   We lay our laurels down."

  _Clapham._                                                     J. E.


                         THE REV. J. BERRIDGE.
                 _To the Editor of the Baptist Magazine._

In your last month's magazine I was not a little pleased to meet once
more the signature of my late excellent friend, John Sutcliff, of Olney.
The story, also, related by him concerning the pious Mr. Berridge,
delighted me much; to see such zeal and firmness in his great Master's
cause, persevered in, even to the end; and to perceive how wonderfully
the Lord protected and delivered him, amidst the most inveterate
enemies. Is not here a striking display of a good Master, and a faithful
servant?

On reading this pleasing and interesting anecdote, it immediately
occurred to my mind, that a long time since I paid a visit to this
excellent man, of a most pleasant kind; it was in the summer of 1777,
when on a journey from Yorkshire to London, through St. Neot's, where I
stopped to supply the congregation of Independents two Sabbaths. Everton
being but a short distance from thence, I felt a strong inclination to
take that opportunity of paying a visit to this good old man, who I had
several times heard preach at the Tabernacle in London, and for whom I
felt no small degree of respect. Consequently I rode over to Everton,
and was kindly invited by the old gentleman to dine with him; on this
occasion, I well remember requesting him to inform me of his adventures
as an itinerant preacher, for I knew he was employed in such services.
The following case Mr. Berridge narrated to me: "I had been preaching in
a village near Cambridge, at a time when there was a strong opposition
in that neighbourhood to preaching out of doors. Having fixed upon the
place, and being furnished with a little table for my pulpit, while I
was engaged, I thought I felt something moving under me, but was not so
much incommoded as to interrupt or hinder me in my work. Having
concluded the service, I retired, safely, from the crowd, into the
cottage of a poor woman. I had not been there long, before some person
came to the door, who wished to see me; but the poor woman was so
alarmed, that she dared not at first open the door, for fear I should be
ill-treated. I desired her immediately to open the door, and not be
afraid. Soon after a man came in, trembling, and most earnestly and
humbly begged my pardon, for he fully intended to throw me down, but
felt himself powerfully restrained from doing so." Mr. Berridge was not
a little affected by his confession, and said to me, I had him under my
table as my prisoner, for he dared not stir to hurt me: and he hoped
this might be followed by happy results to this convicted culprit.

As he rode upon a high horse, which he showed me, he was often
discovered at a considerable distance: and the rude people commonly
cried out, "Here comes the old devil of Everton!"

On the top of Mr. B.'s clock, this remarkable motto was written, "Pay
me short visits." This, I think, was no bad caution to his numerous
visitants.

To conclude my story: Soon, soon all these oppositions to the invaluable
gospel will cease, and the faithful labourer will enter upon his
everlasting rest, when the truly wise shall shine as the brightness of
the firmament, and they that have turned many to righteousness (which,
I doubt not, was the happy case of this faithful servant of God) shall
shine as the stars for ever and ever.

  _K._                                                           R. H.


        ON THE USE OF INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC IN DISSENTING CHAPELS.
                _To the Editor of the Baptist Magazine._

Two pieces have lately appeared in your excellent periodical on this
subject. Though the former considered the use of Instrumental Music, in
Dissenting Chapels, inconsistent with the simplicity of our worship, the
ground is fairly open, I conceive, for further investigation. Believing
that truth is promoted by free discussion, and that your magazine is
friendly to both, I also rely upon your candour, for the admission of
the following observations on the impropriety of Instrumental Music in
the worship of God.

It is, in my opinion, opposed to the spirituality of the New Testament
worship. When the Christian dispensation took the place of the Jewish,
it swept away the load of carnal rites and ceremonies with which that
nation was burdened. Of these carnal ordinances it is universally agreed
that Instrumental Music was a part: with them, therefore, it is finally
abolished; nor do I see how we can reinstate it in the worship of God,
without violating his kingly prerogative, and impairing the spirituality
of his worship, by the introduction of grosser materials, which he has,
by direct appointment, excluded.

Instrumental music appears to me to be a departure from the practice
of the primitive church, as well as a soil upon the spirituality of the
New Testament worship. It has, from time immemorial, been the custom
of innovators upon divine worship to construe the silence of the
scriptures, concerning their innovations, into consent. Every one who
understands the principles of Protestant Dissenters knows that their
silence in such a case is a loud condemnation. No better reason, I
believe, can be assigned for banishing any thing from the worship of the
sanctuary, than the fact, that it is not sanctioned by the command of
the apostles, nor by the example of the early Christians. Where, allow
me to ask, is Instrumental Music sanctioned in the worship of the
Christian dispensation? The apostle Paul exhorts us to "teach and
admonish one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs." The same
apostle, when in jail with Silas at Phillippi, "prayed and sang praises
unto God." Pliny, in his celebrated letter to Trajan, A. D. 106, or 107,
says of the Christians in his time, that they were "accustomed, on a
stated day, to assemble before sunrise, and to join together in singing
hymns to Christ, as to a deity."

But where have the apostles sanctioned Instrumental Music, by precept or
example? When and where did the primitive Christians employ it in the
worship of God? The truth is, as all who are acquainted with
ecclesiastical records know, Instrumental Music is a piece of popish
tinsel and show; and moreover a comparatively recent invention of popery
itself. That musical Instruments were not used, says the author of the
Biblical Cyclopaedia, even in the Popish Church, in Thomas Aquinas's
time, about the year 1250, appears from the passage in his questions:
"In the old law, God was praised both with musical instruments and human
voices; but the Christian church does not use instruments to praise him,
lest she should seem to judaize."

If, Mr. Editor, there is any justness in these observations; if
instrumental music is an inroad upon the spirituality of the New
Testament worship, and a departure from the example of the primitive
church; then it is not its "tendency to create a unison of voices, which
must tend so materially to produce a unity of feeling;" nay, it is
nothing less than the direct command of God that can authorize its
introduction into his worship.

Some may think this paper attaches too much importance to Instrumental
Music, especially when discreetly and soberly used, in divine worship.
But the use of it at all, involves a dangerous principle; and if the
church of Christ allows one erroneous form to encrust itself upon her,
that will soon attract to itself other evils of the same kind, until
the whole is degenerated into one common mass of corruption.

                                                         ANTI MUSICUS.


                                POETRY.

                                STANZAS.

  While, through the regions of the skies,
  Unceasing Alleluias rise,
  Why are the songs on earth so few?
  And why not here unceasing too?
  O Thou, whom there they praise, once slain,
  But, living, and shall ever reign,
  In copious streams thy Spirit pour,
  And waken man from shore to shore;
    Then universal joy shall rise,
    And earth shall emulate the skies.

  Oh! the glad morning! when the song
  Of heavenly praise shall flow along,
  From beauteous field, and hill, and dale!
  When cedar mount, and olive vale,
  Shall burst in glorious singing forth;
  When east and west, and south and north,
  Have but one theme, The Lamb who died!
  The Conqueror, though crucified!
    Then rays from heaven on earth shall shine,
    And make these regions too--divine!

  _Homerton._                                          JAMES EDMESTON.


                               REVIEWS.


     _Memoir of the Late Rev. Joseph Hughes, A.M., one of the
     Secretaries of the British and Foreign Bible Society._ By JOHN
     LEIFCHILD. pp. 498.--Ward.

We are not aware that we can commence our notice of this instructing
volume better than by citing the words with which it concludes: "The
memory of the just is blessed." But then "memory" must be enriched and
refreshed by the knowledge of facts which illustrate the principles and
character of "the just;" and if, with such assistance, it becomes
strengthened and sanctified to enlarge and perpetuate the exercise of
practical piety, it must be "blessed" indeed.

That the perusal, even of the most eminently pious biography, may have
its disadvantages, we are prepared to admit; yet, judicious reflection,
accompanied with progressive experience, will effect much towards
preserving the considerate and devout reader from concluding that human
excellence in the present state, however elevated, can be entirely
detached from some qualifying alloy, or that the less distinguished may
not be raised to the possession of "the best gifts," by that sovereign
benevolence to which every creature, whether in earth or in heaven, is
indebted, for whatever measure of natural superiority or moral greatness
he may obtain.

It remains, therefore, our unshaken conviction, that, upon the whole,
the amount of benefit arising from a suitable regard to such works as
this now before us, vastly preponderates over the influence of certain
objections which, were they allowed to operate beyond suggesting a
salutary caution to the reader, might deprive us of some of the most
powerful _stimuli_ to noble enterprise, and some of the richest sources
of sacred enjoyment.

Mr. Hughes was born, we learn from his own account contained in this
memoir, in London, Jan. 1, 1769. His father was a native of Wales; his
mother, of Lancaster. A few months after his birth, he was put, for the
benefit of country air, to Mrs. Edwards, a nurse residing at Cuffley, on
Enfield Chase, with whom he remained several years. Afterwards his
parents placed him under the instruction of an ancient matron, of the
name of Hudson. At a very early period he assumed a manner and
appearance far above his years. "Joseph," one said to him, "do you love
play?" to which the grotesque little urchin, as he calls himself,
demurely replied, "_I did, formerly!_"

In his tenth year he was received as a pupil and boarder in the family
of Mr. Smalley, minister of a Presbyterian congregation at Darwen, near
Blackburn, in Lancashire. Here he continued for a few of the most
important years of his life. From Darwen he was removed to a free school
at Rivington in the same county. He was baptized by the late Dr.
Stennett, and a few months afterwards was placed upon Dr. Ward's trust
as a theological student in the Academy at Broadmead, Bristol. Dr. Caleb
Evans was President; Mr. James Newton, A.M., Classical Tutor. Here he
continued the usual term, with a view of completing his course in
Scotland. Mr. Hughes thus speaks for himself:--

     "Before quitting Bristol for Scotland, I enjoyed the advantage of
     hearing, as the assistant of Dr. Evans, Robert Hall, who also took
     part in the tuition of the students. The genius and attainments of
     the last individual would be ill pourtrayed by me. They command
     admiration wherever he is known; and if his pen had been as busy
     as his mind is capacious, ardent, and sublime, they would have
     commanded the admiration of distant ages. No one, before I had
     listened to him, had translated the classics in my hearing, with
     equal grace and spirit; no one had given me such an impression of
     intellectual nature: but he seems never to have formed the same
     lofty estimate of himself as he must have known that all his
     acquaintance held most tenaciously. The paucity of his publications
     must be ascribed to this. 'On what subject,' he has substantially
     said, 'can you recommend me to write, on which better things have
     not already appeared than it is in my power to produce?' Hence we
     may account for his diffidence, amounting to anxiety, when he has
     espied among his public auditors, a Parr, or a Mackintosh. Having
     been asked what he thought of the famed John Henderson, he said,
    'I felt myself to be a mere child in his presence.'" p. 37.

In October, 1787, Mr. Hughes set out for Aberdeen, with his
fellow-student, Mr. (afterwards Dr.) John Evans. Here his literary
acquisitions were enriched, and his religious character much improved.
Some attachments and friendships were formed, which, in following years,
were ripened to maturity. Having taken his degree, he spent one session
at Edinburgh, where he was most affectionately received by the venerable
Dr. Erskine.

In 1791, he was solemnly called to the ministry, by the church at Wild
Street, and invited to fill the situation of Classical Tutor at the
Bristol Academy. Dr. Evans dying in August this year, Mr. H. continued
to preach at Broadmead during the remainder of that and nearly the whole
of the following year. About this time he renewed an attachment formed
while a student at Bristol, between himself and Miss Esther Rolph,
youngest daughter of George Rolph, Esq., a respectable solicitor at
Thornbury: who afterwards became his wife, and who lives to lament her
loss.

In December, 1792, Mr. Hughes accepted the office of assistant minister
at Broadmead; Mr. (afterwards Dr.) Ryland, having become the Pastor and
President of the Academy. In this connexion, however, after a time, Mr.
H. encountered difficulties and discouragements which at length
terminated in his removal to Battersea in July, 1796. In the following
year, he was ordained: the service was attended to in the Independent
chapel, at Clapham. Mr. Josiah Thompson, his early patron, delivered the
charge, and Mr. Dore preached to the people. Other parts were taken on
the interesting occasion by Mr. Liddon, of Hemel Hempstead, and Dr.
Rippon, who has survived them all.

The "Religious Tract Society" was instituted in 1799, of which Mr.
Hughes was appointed Secretary, and which office he retained to the
period of his death. But it was as the Secretary of the "British and
Foreign Bible Society" that he was universally known and admired. This
noble institution, which he seems, in conversation with the Rev. T.
Waters, of Worcester, to have admitted originated in a suggestion from
himself, was publicly formed March 7th, 1804, at the London Tavern,
Cheapside; Granville Sharp, Esq., in the chair. To the discharge of the
delightful but onerous duties of this honourable office, he consecrated
his distinguished talents and eminent piety, during nearly the last
thirty years of his life.

Towards the close of his life, in consequence of some trying occurrences
at Battersea, certain efforts were made to remove him into the
metropolis. This movement, however, called forth renewed feelings and
expressions of mutual attachment between himself and the persons who had
so long enjoyed his ministration; and he respectfully declined the
overture which had been made to him from London.

For a considerable time before his death, Mr. Hughes had been afflicted
with a pain in one part of his foot. This did not at first occasion any
alarm; but early in July 1833, having set out on a long journey to
Wales, and other places, on behalf of the Bible Society, the affection
in his foot so increased, and, by the necessary exertion in prosecuting
the object of his journey, became so aggravated, that he was obliged to
retire to the house of a friend in the vale of Abbey Tintern, and give
up what remained of his projected tour. This sickness was to be unto
death; rest and retirement did not mitigate the symptoms of his
complaint. Amidst great suffering he was removed to Bath; and when it
was found that little hope remained of a cure being obtained, he was
conveyed in an invalid carriage from Bath to the house of his son,
where, after continuing a few days, he was taken to his own residence.
Throughout his affliction, though his sufferings appear often to have
been exceedingly acute, he discovered the most exemplary patience and
resignation; the frame of his mind seems to have been uniformly devout
and serene, and his confidence in the person and work of the divine
Redeemer, strong and unwavering. At length, the time of his departure
arrived. On the evening of October the 3rd, 1833, in the sixty-fifth
year of his age, he peacefully left these mortal shores.

The character of his mind, of his studies, of his conversation, of his
oratory on the platform, and of his sermons from the pulpit, Mr.
Leifchild has delineated with the hand of a master, having possessed all
the advantages of personal and confiding friendship. The mental and
moral excellences of Mr. Hughes were unquestionably very exalted; but
his communications often appeared to suffer from what, perhaps, might
not improperly be denominated, a constitutional coldness of manner,
which seemed to impose a sort of reluctant constraint on his own
feelings. We remember a gentleman of the Tract Committee remarking, "I
admire Mr. Hughes--I hear him,--I see him--I want to _feel_ him." It was
evident that, in himself, he felt intensely here; and, doubtless, he now
burns with all the holy ardour of a seraph in the celestial world.

Were it practicable, we should have peculiar satisfaction in gratifying
our readers, and enriching our columns, with lengthened extracts from
this interesting volume; but we must confine ourselves to two, which, we
are sure, both on account of what they contain, and the high respect in
which the writers of them have been long and deservedly held, will be
most acceptable to our readers. The first is from the pen of Mr. Jay.

     "Mr. Hughes was often and much at Bath, formerly, supplying several
     years at Argyle Chapel, for six weeks together, while I was in
     town. I have been intimately acquainted with him for upwards of
     forty-three years, and have exchanged more mind with him than with
     any man I ever knew, except my friend and tutor, Cornelius Winter.
     With regard to religious things, we only differed as to baptism;
     and if we did not love each other the more for this difference, I
     am sure we did not love each other the less. We disagreed, too, a
     little with regard to composition and preaching: he too squeamish,
     and I too careless; he labouring for correctness, and I for
     impression (in grasping which I sometimes erred); he too satisfied
     if he could abide criticism, and I too careless of critical
     judgement, if I could secure effect. Yet, though he was often
     kindly finding fault with me when we were alone, he was always
     seeking opportunities to hear me; and I cannot be ignorant how much
     I shared his commendation, as an author and a preacher. I am
     thankful for my intimacy with him. My esteem of him always grew
     with my intercourse. _I never knew a more consistent, correct, and
     unblemished character._ He was not only sincere, but without
     offence, and adorned the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things.

     "His mind was full of information; his conversation, singularly
     instructive, and very edifying; and while others _talked_ of
     candour and moderation, he _exemplified_ them. In his theological
     sentiments he was firm, yet sober and liberal, and not too orthodox
     (as I have often known this,) to be evangelical. But why do I write
     this? you know it as well as I, and will describe it better."
     p. 143.

Thus Mr. Jay, concerning the lamented Mr. Hughes. But now we introduce
Mr. Foster's letter, addressed to him while languishing into death. "The
letter referred to," says Mr. Leifchild, "as forwarded to him by his
friend, Mr. Foster, the editor is happy in being permitted to
subjoin;--a letter which leaves it hard to determine, whether the
feelings of the writer, or of the receiver, were most to be envied."

                                     "_Stapleton, September 18, 1833._

     "In conveying a few sentences for the last time to my dear old
     friend, I wish to be allowed to say why such a token of sympathy
     and affection is so late.

     "Returning from a long excursion in North Wales, very near the time
     of your removal to London, I was surprised and grieved at the
     report of your seyerely afflicted situation at Bath. My impulse to
     go thither was repressed by the information that no one was
     admitted to see you. After hearing successive accounts, I wrote a
     few lines of inquiry to Mr. Evill; and was answered that you had
     just been removed to London,--with a promise of sending me the
     information they should receive; which has been done. During the
     subsequent time, I have withheld from writing to you, partly by
     information that your great weakness rendered every unusual
     intervention painful to you, and partly by a report confidently
     affirming that you had left this world. But at last, and previously
     to receiving yesterday a message from you through the hands of Mr.
     R. Cottle, I had determined to write to Mr. George, and put it at
     his discretion whether to show you the letter.

     "The thought of my dear and ever faithful friend as now standing at
     the very verge of life, has repeatedly carried me back in memory to
     the period of our youth, when, more than forty years since, we were
     brought into habitual society, and the cordial esteem and
     attachment which have survived, undiminished, through so long a
     lapse of time, and so much separation. _Then_ we sometimes
     conjectured--but in vain--what might be the course appointed us to
     run; and how long; and which might first come to the termination.
     _Now_ the far greater part of that appointment has been unfolded
     and accomplished. To me a little stage further remains under the
     darkness; you, my dear friend, have a clear sight almost to the
     concluding point. And while I feel the deepest pensiveness in
     beholding where you stand, with but a step between you and death, I
     cannot but emphatically congratulate you. I have often felt great
     complacency in your behalf, in thinking of the course through which
     Providence has led you,--complacency in regard to the great purpose
     of life, its improvement, its usefulness, and its discipline and
     preparation for a better world. You are, I am sure, grateful to the
     Sovereign Disposer in the review of it. You have had the happiness
     of faithfully and zealously performing a great and good service,
     and can rejoice to think that your work is accomplished, with a
     humble confidence that the Master will say, "Well done, good and
     faithful servant," while you will gratefully exult in ascribing all
     to his own sovereign mercy in Jesus Christ.

     "But, oh, my dear friend, whither is it that you are going? Where
     is it that you will be a few short weeks or days hence? I have
     affecting cause to think and to wonder concerning that unseen
     world; to desire, were it permitted to mortals, one glimpse of that
     mysterious economy; to ask innumerable questions to which there is
     no answer: What is the manner of existence--of employment--of
     society--of remembrance--of anticipation--of all the surrounding
     revelations to our departed friends. How striking to think that
     _she_[A] so long and so recently with me here, so beloved, but now
     so _totally_ withdrawn and absent--that she experimentally knows
     all that I am in vain inquiring!

     [Footnote A: Mrs. Foster.]

     "And a little while hence, you, my friend, will be an object of the
     same solemn meditations and wondering inquiries. It is most
     striking to consider--to realize the idea--that _you_, to whom I am
     writing these lines, who continue yet among mortals, who are on
     this side of the awful and mysterious veil--that you will be in the
     midst of these grand realities, beholding the marvellous
     manifestation, amazed and transported at your new and happy
     condition of existence, while your friends are feeling the
     pensiveness of your absolute and final absence, and thinking how,
     but just now as it were, you were with them.

     "But we must ourselves follow you to see what it is that the
     emancipated spirits, who have obtained their triumph over death and
     all evil through the blood of the Lamb, find awaiting them in that
     nobler and happier realm of the Great Master's empire; and I hope
     that your removal will be, to your other friends and to me; a
     strong additional excitement, under the influence of the Divine
     Spirit, to apply ourselves with more earnest zeal to the grand
     business of our high calling.

     "It is a delightful thing to be assured on the authority of
     revelation, of the perfect consciousness, the intensely awakened
     faculties, and all the capacities and causes of felicity of the
     faithful in that mysterious separate state and on the same
     evidence, together with every other rational probability, to be
     confident of the re-union of those who have loved one another and
     their Lord on earth. How gloomy, beyond all expression, were a
     contrary anticipation!

     "My friend feels, in this concluding day of his sojourn on earth,
     the infinite value of that blessed faith which confides alone
     in the great Sacrifice for all the sole medium of pardon and
     reconcilement, and the ground of immortal hope. This has always
     been to you the very vitality of the Christian religion: and it
     is so--it is emphatically so--to me also.

     "I trust you will be mercifully supported,--the heart serene, and,
     if it may be, the bodily pain mitigated, during the remaining
     hours, and the still sinking weakness of the mortal frame; and I
     would wish for you also, and in compassion to the feelings of your
     attendant relatives, that you may be favoured so far as to have a
     gentle dismission; but as to this, you will humbly say, 'Thy will
     be done.'

     "I know that I shall partake of your kindest wishes and remembrance
     in your prayers--the few more prayers you have yet to offer before
     you go. When I may follow you, and, I earnestly hope, rejoin you in
     a far better world, must be left to a decision that cannot at the
     most be very remote; for yesterday completed my sixty-third year. I
     deplore before God my not having lived more devotedly to the grand
     purpose; and do fervently desire the aid of the good Spirit, to
     make whatever of my life may remain much more effectually true to
     that purpose than all the preceding.

     "But you, my friend, have accomplished your business--your Lord's
     business--on earth. Go, then, willing and delighted, at his call.

     "Here I conclude, with an affecting and solemn consciousness that I
     am speaking to you for the last time in this world. Adieu, then, my
     ever dear and faithful friend. Adieu--for a while! May I meet you,
     ere long, where we shall never more say, farewell!

                                                          "J. FOSTER."

    _A Beacon to the Society of Friends._ By ISAAC CREWDSON.--Hamilton,
    Adams, and Co. pp. 155. 12mo.

    _A Defence of the Doctrines of Immediate Revelation, and Universal
    and Saving Light: in Reply to some Remarks contained in a work,
    entitled "A Beacon to the Society of Friends."_ By THOMAS HANCOCK,
    M. D. pp. 92. 12mo.

The Beacon ought to be read with serious attention, and with an honest
desire to know "what is truth," by every member of the society, to whom
it is addressed. Members of that society cannot need to be informed
by us of the absurd and impious vagaries, advocated with an air of
solemnity, as shocking as it is ridiculous, by certain members of their
body in America, the leader of whom was Elias Hicks, a man of
considerable acuteness and energy, but who evinced a degree of mental
perversity truly appalling. Members of other societies cannot be
expected to feel any great interest in the sentiments,--if sentiments
they can be called,--avowed with so much complacency by that fanatic, or
even in the rapid progress which they made in America. It were wholly
unnecessary, therefore, even if our limits allowed it, to furnish our
readers with any account of the ultra-mystic theology of Hicks. It will
suffice to say, that there is scarcely a doctrine of revelation which it
does not discard or explain away. The peculiar tenets of this sect were
publicly denounced by the English Quakers at their yearly meeting, held
in London, May, 1832; but we hesitate not to affirm--what we can easily
prove--that the tracts of Elias Hicks are clearly deduced from the
fundamental principles of Quakerism; that many of his statements bear a
very close resemblance to those of the early Friends; and that, however
they may be opposed to those writings which possess divine authority,
they are fully borne out by others, which are of _almost_ equal
authority in the estimation of some members of the Society of Friends,
and which, although that sect acknowledges no creed, are generally
regarded amongst them as standards of religious doctrine.

Let us illustrate this: Elias Hicks speaks with great apparent
devoutness, as well as energy, of a way of salvation, which Christians
in general would imagine peculiarly his own, of which the most assiduous
and prayerful student of the Scriptures would have no conception, and
which, as far as we can learn, never entered the minds of Paul, and
Peter, and John. He says, "It is only by gathering to this light (the
light within) that we can gain a place in his favour; and by
endeavouring that all our actions should proceed from the movings of
this life in the immortal soul; and as this comes to be our case, _we
gain reconciliation_ with the Father." This short sentence will appear
to our readers to contain a sufficient quantity of mysticism for any
purpose, and what is worse, a capital error on a point of vital
importance. The Scriptures represent, _not the light within_, but
CHRIST, "who was delivered for our offences, and rose again for our
justification;" as "our peace, who hath made both (Jews and Gentiles)
one," and hath "reconciled both unto God in one body by the cross." When
the apostles were asked, by an awakened sinner, "What shall I do to be
saved?" they, without any hesitation, replied, "Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved." They always directed men to
Jesus Christ for salvation, for pardon, and for purity, for light and
for life; they believed that Christians are complete in him; but that,
separated from him, they can do nothing. They affirmed that "there is
salvation in none other; neither is there any other name under heaven
given among men, whereby we must be saved." But, if Elias Hicks were
asked by a poor sinner, conscious of his pollution and guilt, but
ignorant of the hope set before us in the gospel, "What shall I do to be
saved?" he would reply, "It is only by gathering to the light--this
saving light that is within us all, that we gain a place in his favour."
He never thought of directing sinners to Jesus Christ for salvation; his
directions uniformly pointed another way: "Oh, then, let us be
individually endeavouring to gather to the light, and wait on the Lord,
that we may see his counsel." But this _anti-christian_ statement, this
opposition to the word of the truth of the gospel, is in perfect
accordance with the avowed and acknowledged principles of Quakerism.

One of the fundamental principles of the system is, "that there is an
evangelical and saving light and grace in all," and that "this light
enlighteneth the hearts of all in a day, in order to salvation, if not
resisted; nor is it less universal than the seed of sin, being the
purchase of his death, who _tasted death for every man; for as in Adam
all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive_." This is the
language of Robert Barclay, the able apologist of Quakerism; and,
perhaps, some of the Friends may tell us, how many degrees _below_ the
authority of Paul and Jesus they hold the Apologist. It must be evident
to every one, at all conversant with the past history and the present
state of the society, that the Friends have ever been, and are still, in
many instances (by far too many), accustomed to direct men, not to Jesus
Christ, who is able to save unto the uttermost all that come to God by
him: but to the principle of light and life within, which "enlighteneth
the hearts of all in a day, in order to salvation, if not resisted."

Closely connected with the doctrine of inward light, is that of
immediate revelation. But the veneration of men for the authority of
Scripture decreases in exact proportion to their zeal for immediate
revelation. Elias Hicks received revelations quite as important in their
nature, as abundant in their measure, and as immediate in their mode of
communication, as any with which the apostle Paul was favoured. He is
therefore entitled to disregard the authority of Scripture! He has in
himself a higher authority! and he is commissioned to direct men to a
better, in every respect a better, guide, than that sure word of
prophecy to which the first Christians were exhorted to take heed, as to
a light shining in a dark place! This is his language: "It is through
this comforter that _all our_ knowledge of God must come; and all that
ever was among rational beings under heaven, came through this medium,
and none other. But, by our believing that we can help ourselves to
heaven by the aid of the Scriptures, _a mere written book_, at the same
time that we understand it so diversely, sets us to warring and
quarrelling. Has not this been long enough the case, for every rational
being to be instructed and to see, that _instead of its being a
sufficient rule of faith, and practice, it is the reverse, for while it
is depended on as such, it hinders from coming to the truth_. The
Scriptures never told us that they were a sufficient rule, but they
recommend us to that from which they themselves bad their origin--the
Spirit of truth." If this be not infidelity, we really know not what is.
Hicks does not even speak of the sacred Scriptures with that decent
respect which one would consider due to the writings of a _brother_
prophet: "The Scriptures a mere written word, which, instead of being a
sufficient rule of faith and practice, is the reverse, and hinders from
coming to the truth!" Such language must draw a sigh from every
Christian breast. But is such language utterly strange in the annals of
Quakerism? Is it unusual in that society to speak of the Scriptures in
terms of disparagement, compared with the teaching of the Spirit, and
immediate revelation? Barclay affirms, that "the _Scriptures_, '_being
outwardly written_,' are the law which brings _condemnation_, and
_kills_; but that the _gospel_ is the _inward_ spiritual law which
_gives life_." He affirms, that "inward, immediate, objective revelation
is the only sure, certain, and immovable foundation of all Christian
faith;" and that "the principal rule of Christians under the gospel is
not an outward letter, but an inward spiritual law; therefore the letter
of Scripture is not, nor can be, the chief or principal rule of
Christians:" and our good friend, Dr. Hancock, represents those in the
society, who "are turning the eye of the mind outward instead of
inward;" that is to say, who are looking to the Scriptures, instead of
to the light within; as "after beginning in the Spirit going back to the
letter," and thus "leaving the fountain of life itself, and 'hewing out
to themselves _broken cisterns_, that can hold no water?'" Are these the
words which are able to save our souls, to make us wise unto salvation
through faith in Christ Jesus? or are these the terms which a Christian
feels himself authorized to apply to those words?

Much might be said, and most justly, of the evil tendencies, and the
pernicious fruits, of this capital error, respecting immediate
revelation, and the consequent disparagement of the living oracles of
God; but we can now simply advert to that grand axiom, which is in the
mouth of all orthodox Friends, and which, they fancy, renders their
notion of the Scriptures as stable as the pillars of the creation, and
as clear as the light of heaven. The axiom, in simple terms, is this:
"The author is greater than his work; the Spirit which gave the
Scriptures is greater than the Scriptures which he gave; therefore the
Spirit, and not the Scriptures, is the first and chief foundation of
truth, ground of faith, and rule of conduct." This would seem all very
plain; but it is very fallacious. The author is greater than his work:
very true; but when you (if we may for a moment address ourselves to
Friends), when you plead for "immediate revelation," as the surest
foundation of all Christian faith, and "the principal rule" of Christian
conduct, you are not placing the author above his work, but _one work_
of the author above _another_ of the works of the same author; you are
not placing the Spirit above the Scriptures, but you are placing the
private and personal revelations of the Spirit to you, above those
revelations of the same Spirit which he gave to apostles and prophets,
for the instruction and salvation of the human race. It is generally
admitted by you, that the "Scriptures were given by inspiration of God;"
that they are a revelation from God to man; that they are words which
"holy men of God spake and penned as they were moved by the Holy
Spirit." Though we were to admit, therefore, that you have in
reality--we believe no such thing--revelations from the Spirit of truth,
it would be absurd to say, that because the author is greater than his
work, these private revelations are a firmer foundation of faith, and a
more certain rule of conduct, than the revelations contained in the
inspired volume: it is not the Spirit which you have, but, at best, a
revelation from the Spirit; and this revelation you place above the
Scriptures, which you acknowledge to be divine--which you admit to be a
revelation from God to man.

It may be vain in us, but we think this remark worthy the attention of
Friends: if we are mistaken in our view of this subject, we should be
happy to be put right; but if we are correct, the main pillar of
Quakerism is overthrown, and the edifice must, as in that case it would
deserve to, fall.

Of Dr. Hancock's work, it may, perhaps, be enough to say, that it
affords a poor defence of notions which many of our readers will believe
do not merit a better. Like some other "defenders of the faith," the
Doctor makes up for a lack of argument, not indeed by an exhibition of
the sword, or the stake, but by positive assertions, by dogmatism, and
by a condemnatory spirit. The unfortunate author of "The Beacon"
appears, in Dr. H.'s opinion, to have committed an almost unpardonable
offence against the society, and, in this opinion, we are sorry to find
the Doctor is by no means singular. It is melancholy to witness the
bitter spirit of intolerance and persecution, which the well-intended
effort of Mr. Crewdson has raised in the Society of Friends--the
peaceable, the nonresisting Friends. It is questionable, even now,
whether the publication of his little volume may not lead--in violation
of one of the fundamental principles of the Society, as stated and
advocated by William Penn, in his address to Protestants, and in
contempt of the spirit of religion, and, happily, of the age in which
we live,--to the exclusion of Mr. Crewdson from the Society of Friends.
Alas for poor human nature! whatever else may change, this is always
the same--the same, whether under a bishop's mitre, or a Quaker's
broad-brim. The "Defence" may certainly appear a powerful thing to those
who entirely agree with the author: those who differ from him will
probably be of another mind. A few short extracts will suffice to show
the _clearness_ and _consistency_ of the author's statements. In page
17, he says, "I consider every opinion which has not their (the
Scriptures') support must fall to the ground;" but in page 8 he says,
"If nothing of divine influence, in the days of Fox and Penn--nothing, I
say, but the light and knowledge of Scripture, had operated on the minds
of men, then, I believe, _our religious Society would never have had
existence_, for they were taught immediately _by_ Christ, and they
directed all _to_ Christ." Every opinion not supported by Scripture must
fall to the ground: then Quakerism must necessarily sink; for, according
to the Doctor's own showing, that system owes its very existence, not to
the Scriptures, but to something else--to immediate revelation. In page
22, he says, "_Neither the opinion of Robert Barclay, nor that of any
other man, would weigh with me_, if I did not consider that it was
founded on a correct and enlarged view of Scripture doctrine:" very
good; but then, in the very next sentence, he adds, "I quote the Apology
of Robert Barclay, concluding, that one who is now _a minister_ (Mr.
Crewdson), _in outward fellowship in the same society with myself, can
hardly be supposed_ TO HAVE THROWN OFF THE AUTHORITY OF A WORK _so
justly esteemed as it is amongst us_; for this would imply, that his
_departure from the ground of our testimonies_ was greater than I am yet
willing to believe it to be." The opinion of Barclay has no weight: yet
no man in the Society of Friends can be supposed to have thrown off the
authority of Barclay's Apology! We cordially congratulate the Society of
Friends on the appearance of the "Beacon;" and sincerely pray, that a
spirit of inquiry may be universally excited, and that the divine
authority of the Scriptures, as the sole and sufficient rule of faith
and practice, may eventually, and even speedily, be established in the
mind of every individual amongst them. Of Dr. Hancock we know nothing;
and of that gentleman, personally, we cannot, and will not, say anything
bordering on disrespect; but we heartily wish the Mystics and Quietists
all the joy, to which they are _fairly entitled_ from his Defence.


                               OBITUARY

                           REV. R. COMPTON.

The Rev. Robert Compton, late minister of the General Baptist church and
congregation, at Isleham, Cambridgeshire, was born at Withybrook, near
Monk's Kirby, in Warwickshire, on the 21st of February, 1780. He had the
unspeakable privilege of being the son of parents decidedly pious. His
father died more than thirty years ago; but his mother, whom he visited
for the last time in August, 1833, survived until some time early in the
spring of the last year; when, in a good old age, she slept in Jesus,
and entered into her rest, preceding her son to glory only a few months.

Mrs. Compton, lik Eunice, possessing "unfeigned faith," discovered great
concern for the spiritual welfare of her children, not only praying for
them, but conversing with them on the most important and deeply
interesting subject that can engage the thoughts of young persons,--the
way in which mercy is extended to sinners. Her anxiety that her children
might walk in the paths of peace led her, in conversation with Christian
friends, freely to express her views in reference to their religion.
When about seventeen years of age, our late friend overheard his mother
telling a person that she had some hopes of the piety of her son George,
but had none respecting her son Robert. This, connected with the
circumstance of his brother John, about the same time, becoming decided
for the Lord, very powerfully wrought upon his mind, and he could not
dislodge the thought--"If my brothers should go to heaven, and I should
perish!" From this time he began to seek the Lord by prayer, and reading
the holy Scriptures with a new and peculiar delight. Before he was
eighteen years old, he made a public profession of his repentance and
faith, being baptized in company with his brother John, and several
other persons; and became a member of the General Baptist church at
Hinckley, in Leicestershire.

Having now found a Saviour suited to his own circumstances as a guilty
ruined sinner, he was anxious to direct other guilty and ruined sinners
to the same refuge; and being encouraged by his friends, he began to
preach the gospel in the neighbouring villages.

A few years after Mr. Compton began to explain the Scriptures in the
vicinity of his native place, he removed into Cambridgeshire, residing
first at Harston, then at Sawston; and preaching frequently to the
congregations at Ashwell, in Hertfordshire, and at the latter mentioned
place of his residence. From Sawston, he came to reside at Isleham, in
the year 1816, and was ordained pastor over the General Baptist church
and congregation here, October the 29th, 1817, where, with fidelity and
great affection, he continued to labour almost to the time of his death.

Soon after Mr. Compton came to Isleham, he was called to mourn under a
sudden and most painful stroke, in the death of his kind and endeared
companion, who left behind her five children, at an age when they were
almost unconscious of their loss. A kind Providence, however, soon
repaired his loss, by leading him to contract a second marriage with the
highly esteemed lady who survives him.

Mr. Compton was, a few years ago, a strong man; formed as if for
vigorous, persevering, and unwearied effort. A little more than three
years since, evident symptoms of consumption appeared; and in each
succeeding spring they increased, and threatened to put an end to his
faithful and successful labours. During the spring and summer of 1834,
he appeared fast hastening to the grave. His emaciated countenance, his
feeble and almost inaudible voice, and his increasing debility, clearly
indicated the near approach of death. Not only did his weakened frame
show the nearness of the last enemy, but the detachment of his mind from
the world--the calm and serene composure of soul which he enjoyed--the
strength and firmness of his hope and confidence in the righteousness of
Jesus Christ, gave satisfying evidence that he was ripening for glory.

He did not attempt to preach for some weeks before he died, but was not
prevented; the whole of any Lord's-day during his affliction, from going
to the meeting-house. Only two days previous to his death, he
administered the solemn and interesting, but too much neglected,
ordinance of the Lord's Supper to his beloved people. Oh! it was a time
not to be forgotten, when he took his affectionate farewell of all the
members of the of the church who were present! The writer of this
memorial well remembers seeing several of Mr. C.'s friends returning
home from the meeting-house on this occasion, whose countenances
evidenced a strong persuasion that they should never see the face or
hear the voice of their beloved pastor again in this world. The pleasing
and delightful state of his mind, in the last days of his life, will be
discovered in the following communication to the writer of this sketch
from the pen of a near relative.

"During the whole of his illness he maintained the greatest calmness and
composure; the enemy was not once permitted to disturb his peace, or to
shake his confidence in God. On one occasion, a short time before his
departure, he said to a friend, 'The Lord is very kind to me; for while
he afflicts me with one hand, he supports me with the other; yes, he
_always_ has been good to me, he _never_ has forsaken me;' and with his
characteristic energy added, 'And nobody shall make me believe that he
will ever forsake me now.' When conversing with another friend on the
bright and glorious prospect he had of future bliss, he said, 'I am very
ambitious, for I am striving for a crown; and it is one which will never
fade away.' His family did not perceive him to be materially worse,
until the Saturday previous to his death; but from the evident change
which then took place, they urged his staying at home on the
sabbath-day; to this he replied, 'I have a great wish to go, perhaps,
for the last time.' His wish was complied with, and, propped up with
pillows in an easy chair, he, for the last time, distributed to his
weeping church the memorials of the Saviour's death; and, with wonderful
composure, although with feeble steps, he walked round the aisles of the
chapel, and took leave of all the persons present. On the Monday he
appeared fast sinking into the arms of death; and, on a friend saying to
him, 'The conflict will soon be over,' he replied, 'Do you think
so?--I'm afraid not.' The restlessness of death was evidently now upon
him, and on being assisted up stairs, a distressing fit of coughing came
on, accompanied by difficulty of respiration, and the loss of all power
to expectorate: this continued with but little cessation during the
night. A highly esteemed friend visiting him early in the morning of
Tuesday (the day on which he died), he said, 'Well, Madam, we have often
talked together about heaven, I hope I shall soon be there,' adding,
'but, perhaps, you will pray with me once more on earth?' This was most
kindly complied with. My mother asked what passage of Scripture she
should read; he promptly replied, 'The 116th Psalm;' many parts of which
were strikingly and beautifully adapted to his own circumstances at that
moment. After prayer, he said to the same friend, 'If I get safe to
heaven, and should hear that you are coming (and am permitted) I will
welcome you there.' On being asked if Christ was precious to him, he
said, 'More than any thing else; the world is nothing to me now; death
has lost its sting, and the grave has no terrors.' Repeatedly, during
the day, he said, 'Oh! how gladly could I lie down and die!--O that I
had wings like a dove!' &c. To his highly esteemed brother, Mr.
Reynolds, he said, 'Well, Sir, when I am gone, I shall want you to bury
me;--do not say much about me, preach to the people, and tell them to be
stedfast,' &c. On one of his family coming to his bedside, he said:
'Love not the world, nor the things that are in it; set your affections
on things that are above, and trust in the Lord at all times.' To
another, 'Live near to God, put your trust in him, and he will carry you
through.' To his youngest daughter he affectionately said, 'Remember
your Creator, my dear Betsy, in the days of your youth, perhaps you may
not live to be old.'--His end was peace: he was not the subject of
ecstasies; but he possessed a stable confidence, of which the approach
of the last enemy could not deprive him."

At the comparatively early age of fifty-four years, this devoted servant
of Christ left this transitory world, about five o'clock in the
afternoon of Tuesday, the 5th day of August, 1834; calmly and serenely
falling asleep in Jesus.

On Monday, the 11th, his mortal remains were conveyed to the
burying-ground belonging to the meeting-house, and there interred and
left to moulder into dust, until the voice of the archangel and the
trump of God shall raise them.

Agreeably to the request of our departed brother, Mr. Saunders, of
Barton-Mills, delivered an address at the grave; and the people then
assembled in the meeting-house to hear the funeral sermon, which, at the
request of his beloved brother, was preached by the Particular Baptist
minister residing in the same village, from 1 Cor. xv. 58: "Therefore,
my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast;" &c. Prayer was offered at the
grave by the Rev. J. Jarrom, of Wisbeach; and the brethren Mays, of
Fordham, and Buckpitt, of Burwell, prayed in the meeting-house. As an
evidence of the high esteem in which Mr. Compton was deservedly held,
these services were numerously attended from the neighbouring
congregations, although it was in the midst of harvest, when every hour
is of great importance.

There was in Mr. Compton, a combination of excellences; a happy
temperament of mind, a cheerfulness of disposition, and a great flow of
animal spirits; these being under the influence and regulation of divine
grace, he was calm and unmoved by events that would have overwhelmed
many other men.

As a neighbour, benignity and kindness emanated from his heart, dwelt
upon his countenance, and were expressed in his words and actions.

As a Christian, integrity and uprightness, consistency of character,
deep humility, fervent devotion, liberality of feeling and conduct
towards those who differed from him on some points of doctrine, an
ardent love to Jesus Christ, to his word, and to his people, were
features by which he was eminently distinguished.

Zeal for his Master's cause, love to the souls of men, active,
persevering, and laborious efforts to make known the word of life to his
perishing fellow-creatures, characterized the public ministry of our
departed friend.

As a pastor, he was diligent, faithful, and affectionate. As a husband
and a father, his worth was known and appreciated by his bereaved widow
and children.

Mr. Compton had the unusual pleasure and satisfaction to know, before he
left this world, that all his children were walking in the fear of the
Lord. Six of his own, and five others, for whose spiritual and eternal
well-being he most deeply felt and most fervently prayed, were all
devoted to the Lord! O ye Christian parents! let this encourage you to
pray earnestly and constantly for your children.

The above is, much of it, extracted from the funeral sermon, the
preacher of which did not know, when he referred to six of Mr. C.'s
children as walking in the fear of the Lord, that his eldest daughter
had entered into heaven more than three weeks before her father, and was
then with his glorified spirit in the presence of Jesus, where hope and
fear had issued in never ending fruition.

Mrs. Mary Ann Goadby, eldest daughter of our departed brother, and wife
of the Rev. J. Goadby, General Baptist Missionary at Cuttack, in Orissa,
left England, with her husband, in July, 1833, and landed in India some
time in the month of December.

During the months of May and June last year, she experienced great
languor and debility from the influence of the climate, and on the 13th
of July her deathless spirit took its flight into the presence of Jesus,
there in triumph to welcome the arrival of her father's on the 5th of
August.

                                                                 J. R.


                       RELIGIOUS INTELLIGENCE.

ANTI-SLAVERY DEPUTATION, FROM THE UNITED STATES TO EUROPE.

We have great pleasure in informing our readers, that the Rev. Dr. Cox,
Professor of Theology at Auburn seminary, in the state of New York, has
been deputed by the Executive Committee of the American Anti-slavery
Society to visit Europe, in conjunction with the Rev. Joshua Leavitt,
the talented editor of the New York Evangelist, _for the purpose of
effecting a union of the abolitionists of the two Continents, in efforts
to extinguish slavery and the slave trade throughout the world_. Dr. Cox
is already well known to the Christian public of this country by his
previous visit. His distinguished companion enjoys the reputation among
Christians of all denominations in the United States. The paper he so
ably conducts stands first among the religious journals of his country.
These gentlemen are expected in London the beginning of this month; and
we are informed that, as soon after their arrival as possible, the
Committee of the $1 will convene a public meeting to receive
them, of which due notice will be given.

To the Christian philanthropist it will afford the greatest satisfaction
to learn, that the glorious cause of emancipation is rapidly advancing
to its consummation in the United States. "The people are rousing--the
pulpits are opening--the cities are shaking--the press is speaking--the
Congress is acting; and, soon, the topic of slavery will be the text of
the clergyman--the theme of the patriot--and the subject of prayer and
exertion of the philanthropist and the Christian." Thus writes a
distinguished individual from America, whose labours have been eminently
blessed in this field of Christian benevolence. May the Lord hasten the
time when every yoke shall be broken, and the oppressed in every land
shall go free!

       *       *       *       *       *

        PREMIUM OFFERED FOR A PRIZE ESSAY ON THE LOVE OF MONEY.

It is the opinion of many of the wisest and best of men, that the
besetting sin of professors of christianity is _the love of money_; and
yet, there is no subject on which so little has been written well. The
late Andrew Fuller says, "It will, in all probability, prove the eternal
overthrow of more characters among professing people, than any other
sin; because it is almost the only crime which can be indulged, and a
profession of religion at the same time supported."

_One Hundred Guineas_, besides the profits of its publication, will be
presented to the author of the best essay on this subject. Preference
will be given to the most spiritual, poignant, and affectionate appeal
to the judgment and consciences of those who professedly recognize the
authority of revelation, on avaricious hoarding, and unchristian-like
expenditure, to gratify the lust of the eye, and pride of life, whilst
they avow their obligations to redeeming mercy, and profess that
themselves, and all they have, is not their own, but belongs, and must
be accounted for, to Him who has said, "Occupy till I come," and then
"Give an account of thy stewardship, for thou mayest be no longer
steward." The work wanted, is one that will bear upon selfishness, as it
leads to live to ourselves, and not for God and our fellow-men.

It is requested that reference may be made to the different estimates of
man who blesseth, and of God, who abhorreth, the covetous (Ps. x. 3);
and to the tremendous consequences of this sin, which is associated with
the vilest of crimes which exclude from the kingdom of heaven. (Eph. v.
5.) The manuscript is to be sent to Dr. Conquest, 13, Finsbury Square,
on or before the 1st of November, 1835; with a sealed letter, containing
the address of the writer. The Hon. and Rev. Baptist Noel and the Rev.
Dr. Pye Smith have kindly engaged to be the arbitrators. The reward will
be adjudged on the 1st of May, 1836.

       *       *       *       *       *

       BRIEF HISTORY OF THE BAPTIST CHURCH, KEIGHLEY, YORKSHIRE.

The Baptists were first introduced into Keighley by a Mr. John Town, who
was a member of the Baptist church at Haworth, under the care of the
venerable and Rev. Miles Oddy. Keighley was at that time beginning to be
a large and populous place. The clergyman in the establishment was an
irreligious character, and the Independent church and congregation were
nearly extinct.

At first the ministers were permitted to preach in the Independent
meeting-house; but after some time a Mrs. Sunderland offered her house,
until Mr. Town could fit up a room for constant worship. The ministers
who kindly assisted in the formation of the infant cause were, Messrs.
Steadman, D. D., Shuttleworth, Trickett, and Shaw.

In the year 1809, or 1810, four persons were baptized by Mr.
Shuttleworth, pastor of the church at Cowlinghill: and on the third of
June, 1810, a large upper room in the house of Mr. Town was opened for
worship by Mr. Shepherd, from Bradford, who preached on this occasion
from Solomon's Song, vi. 10. The congregation increased; others were
baptized; and in the year 1812 the church was formed. In 1813 it was
deemed necessary to erect a chapel. A piece of ground was provided by
Mr. Town; and on Easter Monday, 1813, the first stone was laid; but the
chapel was not opened until the 29th of March, 1815; when Mr. Lister, of
Liverpool, Mr. Stephens, of Rochdale, and the venerable Dr. Steadman, of
Bradford, were engaged. At this period the church consisted of eighteen
members. The chapel cost something more than L990; and will seat about
615 persons.

The first pastor of the church was Mr. Joseph Shaw, who came to Keighley
in 1814. During the years 1816, 1817, and 1818, little is said: but in
1819 the members amounted to 33; and some uneasiness originating with a
part of the church and the minister, a separation took place, and a new
chapel was erected by the party attached to Mr. Shaw, at Slacklane, from
two to three miles from Keighley. This circumstance left the church at
Keighley very small, and greatly diminished the congregation.

In 1820 Mr. Thomas Blundell took the oversight of the people in the
Lord. The members again numbered 32. In 1824 a large portion of the debt
was removed; soon after which, the pastor was taken ill, and on July
1st, 1824, resigned his spirit into the hands of Him who gave it. During
this year four members were also removed to the world of spirits; among
whom were Mr. Town and his wife, who died within ten days of each other;
and whose remains were deposited in the burial-ground adjoining the
chapel; and to whose memory a handsome tombstone has been erected by the
family.

These strokes of mortality appear to have been sanctified--a spirit of
prayer has been excited--and a morning prayer-meeting established to
seek divine direction in the choice of a pastor. And on Sunday, Aug.
15th, 1824, the present pastor, Mr. Abraham Nichols, then under the care
of Dr. Steadman, and a member of the church at Rawden, under the care of
Mr. Hughes, preached his first sermons at Keighley, and baptized two
persons at Turkeymill. From this time his visits to Keighley became
frequent; and on the first of November, he received an invitation to
become pastor. On the 30th of January, 1825, he accepted the invitation,
and preached from Rom. xv. 30, to the end.

Things now began to wear rather an animating appearance. Some gentlemen
were at the expense of fitting up a baptistry; and Mr. Jos. Town,
youngest son of the above-mentioned Mr. Town, presented the minister
with a Bible and hymn book for the pulpit. This gentleman is a deacon of
the Baptist church at Leeds, under the care of the Rev. J. Acworth, A.M.

A subscription was also entered into for the liquidation of the debt
upon the chapel; and on the 25th of December, 1825, the friends, at the
close of two sermons by Mr. Stephens of Rochdale, realized the sum of
L166 0s. 6d., including L30 each from the two Mr. Towns, L15 from a
sister, and L10 from a brother-in-law; with many other equally noble
sums, according to the ability of the parties.

On the 15th of August, 1826, Mr. Nichols was ordained, when Mr. Mann,
late of Mazepond, London, stated the nature of a gospel church; Mr.
Hughes offered the ordination prayer; Dr. Steadman delivered the charge,
from 2 Sam. x. 12; and Mr. Godwin addressed the church, from 1 Thess. v.
12, 13.

In 1829 the singing gallery was altered, and the bottom of the chapel
pewed; also, a very substantial and convenient house was built for the
minister, which cost about L260, towards the expense of which there was
L188 (duty off) left as an endowment by J. Holmes, Esq., of Stanbury,
near Haworth, and which could be appropriated to no purpose but for the
advantage of the minister.

In 1830, the burial-ground having been enlarged on each side, a portion
of the debt was removed.

In 1834 and 1835, the ground was again enlarged, by the addition of 312
yards; and a new school-room erected, towards which, including a grant
through the British and Foreign School Society, the subscriptions and
collections, &c., have amounted to about L220.

The Sabbath-school contains near 100 children; the congregation,
including 91 families or parts of families, will average from 300 to
400; the number of members, near 70.

The following persons have been deacons of the church, viz.:

John Beadley, who died July 20th, 1827; funeral sermon from 1 Cor. vii.
29, 30. Jonas Rhodes, who died Oct. 11th, 1832. Samuel Clapham, who died
March 24th, 1833. (There is a short account of each of the two latter in
the Baptist Tract Magazine, for 1833.) Joseph Milner, who died April,
1834; and who had been deacon from the formation of the church.

The present deacons are,--Mr. John Town, Turkey-Mills; Mr. Joseph
Laycock, Knowl; and Mr. Joseph Hall, North-street.

       *       *       *       *       *

              STATE OF THE BAPTIST INTEREST AT LYNN.

From our personal knowledge of Mr. Poile, and of the circumstances of
the following case, we respectfully recommend the perusal of it to all
who feel the necessity, and who are in any measure enabled to assist in
the support of a sound evangelical exhibition of the unsearchable riches
of Christ.

                                         W. H. MURCH, Stepney College.
                                        W. BROCK, St. Mary's, Norwich.

It is extensively known that the Baptist interest at Lynn Regis has been
for many years in a depressed condition--a fact which has been much
deplored by the friends of the denomination on the spot, and by those
who have been acquainted with the circumstances of the case. In
presenting it to the notice of the friends of the Redeemer, with the
hope of securing their Christian sympathies and assistance, a brief
outline of the case will not be deemed unnecessary.

The Baptist church at Lynn appears to have been formed about the year
1760, by Mr. Chesterton, who was succeeded in the pastoral office by the
Rev. W. Richards, M.A., and afterwards by Mr. Durrant, who gratuitously
laboured among the people for several years. The place of worship,
occupied until nearly the close of Mr. Durrant's ministry, was a small
hired chapel in Broad-street, which was afterwards purchased. About this
time it was deemed advisable by the friends to erect a new
meeting-house; and for this purpose a piece of land was bought adjoining
the old place. The purchase of the ground and the erection of the
building, capable of seating 300 persons, amounted to L1269 8s.; to the
reduction of which, Messrs. Durrant and Brindley gave L200 each; L47
16s. were collected in Lynn; leaving a debt on the place of L821 12s.
The pulpit having been occupied for a short period by different
ministers, the church was induced to invite one of respectable talents
to become their pastor, whose connexion with them, in consequence of his
adoption of doctrinal errors, extended to no longer a period than twelve
months. During that period a large and respectable congregation was
attracted; the greater part of whom, however, having imbibed the errors
which have been referred to, left the place with the minister, and
erected a Socinian chapel; thus giving occasion for regret, not only
that error was propagated, but by those to whom the Baptist cause was
looking for support. From that period to the present many efforts have
been made to revive the cause; and the debt, in 1812, by means of an
appeal to the friends at Lynn, Dereham, Yarmouth, and Norwich, was
reduced to L702 9s. A great variety of ministers have laboured, with
more or less success, some of whom are now occupying important stations
in different parts of the country.

A combination of causes occasioned the removal of many, apparently well
suited to raise the interest; but that which seems more than any thing
else to have deprived the church and town of the labours of devoted
servants of Christ, was the _legal_ and _pecuniary_ embarrassments of
the place. It will easily be conceived that, amidst events thus adverse,
the church was frequently threatened with extinction, and the cause
nearly given up for lost by those who hoped even against hope.

In September, 1832, the writer of this article acceded to the request of
the church to pay them a visit, by the advice of his tutors, and
received, at the expiration of a month, an unanimous invitation to spend
a longer period, with a view to a settlement. An assurance that the
legal difficulties would speedily be settled, and the hope that his
labours might be blessed, induced him to comply. Various efforts were
made to hasten this, without avail, until July, 1833, when it was
thought by the friends generally, that it would be much to the advantage
of the cause if a new place could be erected in a more eligible part of
the town; and it was determined, by the advice of the Rev. W. H. Murch,
president of Stepney College, to ascertain its practicability. The
smallness, however, of the resources at home, and the promises from
abroad, rendered such an attempt unjustifiable; so that nothing could be
done, but either to use every effort to secure the old place, or to give
up the cause entirely. The former step was finally decided on; and the
writer consented to struggle, with the church, until a faithful God
should answer the prayers of his people. After much trouble and anxiety,
the _legal_ business was settled on February 19th, 1835, and L100 was
paid, which had been collected in the town. Lord's-day, 21st, was held
as a day of thanksgiving, and the season improved by sermons from Ps.
cxv. 1, and Ps. cxviii. 25. It was a day that will long be remembered by
many present.

The number in the church in 1832 was 30; since that time 27 have been
baptized, to whom several others expect shortly to be added, who are
affording proofs that they have given themselves to the Lord. The
congregation is now good, and harmony prevails in the church. There is a
Sunday school of 250 children, an adult class, two Bible classes, and an
ecclesiastical history class. On Friday, March 6, the foundation-stone
of a Sunday school-room, 44 ft. by 34 ft. (to be used also as a
day-school), was laid by Mr. Wilson, missionary of the Sunday School
Union. The cost of the building will be L170, of which L60 have been
collected, principally in Lynn; and it is earnestly hoped that the
friends of scriptural education will give their generous aid towards so
desirable an object amidst 15,000 inhabitants. The necessity of
repairing and cleaning the chapel, to make it _tenantable_, will be
obvious when it is stated, that scarcely any thing has been done to it
since it was built, 26 years ago. To do this, and render it commodious,
will require upwards of L200. The debt which the friends will be obliged
to remove as speedily as possible, so as to be able to carry on the
cause, is L500, leaving a mortgage on the place of L600, at 4 per cent.,
the interest of which the rents of property will nearly meet.

As nothing now appears needful to render the Baptist cause at Lynn,
under the Divine blessing, a useful and respectable interest, but the
united aid of the friends of the Redeemer, it is earnestly hoped that a
faithful statement of facts will not only meet the eye of those who have
it in their power to assist, but that the evil _so much_ and _so
greatly_ to be deprecated--a minister leaving his people to travel for
money, may in this case be dispensed with; and that, instead of the
cause at Lynn being a matter of deep regret to the Christian church, it
may become a praise in the earth.

                                                          W. F. POILE.


                             ASSOCIATIONS.

              THE HALF-YEARLY WEST HANTS. MINISTERS' MEETING

Was held at Bewley, April 8th, 1835. The afternoon was spent by the
brethren in conference and prayer.

The public service took place in the evening. Brother Burt, the pastor,
began by solemn prayer. Brother Turquand read the Scriptures, prayed,
and spoke on "Perseverance in doing Good." Brother Burnett followed him
in prayer, and mentioned some of "The principal Sources of Encouragement
and Consolation." Brother Yarnold succeeded him in prayer, and
illustrated "The Practical Influence of the Gospel." Brother Ford
addressed the Divine Majesty, and made some remarks "On the Importance
of Growing in Grace." Brother Adams, also, offered supplication, and
showed the intimate connexion between doctrinal and practical godliness.
And brother Draper closed the protracted but interesting services of the
evening, by prayer, and a brief address "On the Blessings entreated for
the Ephesians by the Apostle,--that they might 'know the love of Christ,
which passeth knowledge; and be filled with all the fulness of God.'"

The next meeting to be held, by the Divine blessing, at Romsey,
Wednesday, Sept. 9th, 1835.

       *       *       *       *       *

                    LONDON BAPTIST ASSOCIATION.

The Annual Meeting of this Association was held on Wednesday, April 22,
at the Rev. Mr. Overbury's chapel, in Eagle-street, Red Lion Square.
Letters from the associated churches were read by their respective
pastors, detailing their circumstances during the past year; after which
a circular letter, drawn up by the Rev. Mr. Steane, was read, approved,
and ordered to be printed for the use of the churches. The Rev. J. E.
Giles was chosen Secretary, and T. Pewtress, Esq., Treasurer, for the
year ensuing.

In the evening, a public service was held in the same place; when the
Rev. Mr. Price delivered a serious and practical sermon, "On the Duties
of Church Members towards the Young."

The next Quarterly Meeting to be held at Camberwell, July 23rd. Mr.
Davies, of Tottenham, to preach.


                           NOTICES.

The Southern Association of Hants. will take place this year in Meeting
House Alley, Portsea, June the 9th and 10th. On Tuesday evening the
letters from the churches will be read; and brother Hancock, of
Yarmouth, will preach. Wednesday morning, brother Millard is expected
to preach; and some other brother in the evening.

                                                  T. TILLY, Secretary.
  _Portsea, April 15, 1835._

       *       *       *       *       *

The Annual Meeting of the Bedfordshire Association of Baptist churches
will be held at the Old Baptist Meeting, Rushden, in Northamptonshire,
on Tuesday, May 19th; on which occasion the Rev. Messrs. S. Fordham, of
Hale Weston, J. Upton, of London, and J. Jenkinson, of Kettering, are
engaged to preach.

The ministers and messengers of the churches are requested to meet at
half-past nine o'clock.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Association of Baptist Congregational Churches, in Oxfordshire and
adjacent counties, will hold their next annual meeting at Cirencester,
instead of Fairford, on Tuesday and Wednesday in the Whitsun week, June
9th and 10th. The letters from the churches will be read on the Tuesday
evening, at half-past 5 o'clock.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next meeting of the Northamptonshire Association will be held at
Kettering, on the Tuesday and Wednesday in Whitsun week. The services
will be conducted as usual, commencing at 6 o'clock on the Tuesday
evening, when the letters from the churches will be read. Mr. Gray, of
Northampton, and Mr. Craps, of Lincoln, have engaged to preach. Put up
at the White Hart (not the White Horse, as misprinted in the last
year's Circular Letter).

       *       *       *       *       *

The churches connected with the Bristol Association are respectfully
informed, their next meeting will be held at Counterslip, Bristol, on
the Tuesday and Wednesday in Whitsun week, June 9th and 10th, 1835
(instead of Wednesday and Thursday), in consequence of the annual
meeting of the Bristol Education Society, on Thursday, 11th of June.
Brother Jones, of Frome, to preach the Association sermon. Brethren
Saffery, of Salisbury, and Newman, of Shortwood, to be the other
preachers. Brother Summers to write the Circular Letter; the subject,
_The Second Coming of Christ_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fifty-sixth Anniversary of the Kent and Sussex Association of
Baptist Churches will be held (Providence permitting), at Lewes, Sussex,
on Tuesday and Wednesday, June 2nd and 3rd. The brethren Rogers and
Matthews to preach. The Annual Meeting of the Kent Auxiliary Baptist
Missionary Society will be held on Wednesday evening. Put up at the
Crown Inn, Market Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Anniversary of the Baptist chapel at Staines, Middlesex, will be
held (D.V.) on Wednesday, the 20th of May. The Rev. T. Binney stands
engaged to preach in the morning; the Rev. Edw. Steane in the afternoon;
and the Rev. J. Smith in the evening.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next Anniversary meeting of the Bedfordshire Union of Christians
will be held at Bedford, on Wednesday, May 27th; when the Rev. J. J.
Davies, of Tottenham, is expected to preach in the morning; and the Rev.
G. B. Phillips, of Harrold, in the evening.

       *       *       *       *       *

The annual meeting of "The Protestant Society for the Protection of
Religious Liberty" will be held at the City of London Tavern, on
Saturday, May 16th, at 11 o'clock precisely. Some distinguished Peer is
expected to preside.

       *       *       *       *       *

On Wednesday, the 20th of May, the Rev. C. B. Woodman will be set apart
to the pastoral office over the church assembling in Artillery-street
chapel, Bishopsgate, London. The Rev. Messrs. Isaiah Birt, Thomas Price,
of Devonshire Square, J. E. Giles, of Salter's Hall, with other
ministers, have engaged to officiate on the occasion. Service to
commence at 6 o'clock in the evening.


                             RECENT DEATH.

                           REV. J. WHEELER.

Died, on Friday, the 27th of March, aged 62, the Rev. J. Wheeler, pastor
of the Baptist church, Bugbrook, Northamptonshire. His funeral took
place on Wednesday, the 1st of April. The Rev. T. Wake, of Thislingbury,
read a suitable portion of the Scriptures, and prayed; the Rev. W. Gray,
of Northampton, delivered the address, and on the following Sabbath, to
a crowded congregation, preached the funeral sermon, from Jude 21:
"Looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life." A
text expressly chosen by the deceased.

Mr. Wheeler had been settled with his people for nearly 32 years; and it
is pleasing to notice, that some of the last years of his ministry were
the most successful. Twelve months he was laid aside from his public
labours; and in the sick room, and on the bed of pain, illustrated and
magnified those principles which, for successive years, he had preached
to others.


                           NEW PUBLICATIONS.

                           _Just Published._

Memoir of the Life and Writings of the Rev. Joseph Ivimey, late pastor
of the church in Eagle-street, London, and twenty years Gratuitous
Secretary to the Baptist Irish Society. By Rev. George Pritchard.

Parts I. to VI. of the Biographical Sketch of the Rev. Edward Irving.
Edited by William Jones, M.A. To which is added, Thirty Sermons,
preached by Mr. Irving, during the first three years of his residence in
London.

In 32mo. A Memoir of J. Howard Hinton, who died at Reading, Jan. 10,
1835, aged thirteen years and seven months. By his Father.

                            _In the Press._

Reminiscences relating to the Rev. John Ryland, A.M., of Northampton,
the father of the late Rev. Dr. Ryland, of Bristol. By William Newman,
D.D.

                      _Preparing for Publication._

The History of Protestant Nonconformity in England, from the
Reformation, under Henry VIII., to the Accession of the House of
Hanover. In two volumes, 8vo. By THOMAS PRICE. The Work will be founded
on an extensive and careful investigation of Original Authorities, and
will be designed to exhibit the Progress of Opinion as well as the
Course of Events.

       *       *       *       *       *

Erratum: P. 141, l. 6, for _a final_ read _an efficient_.




                            IRISH CHRONICLE.
                               MAY, 1835.


At the particular request of the Rev. J. Allen, and for the satisfaction
of those friends who have kindly and liberally assisted towards
defraying the debt incurred by the erection of the Chapel at Ballina,
the statement of the entire account, and the several sums contributed,
appear in this number of the Chronicle. As the funds of the Society are
not at all applicable to the building of places of worship, but as their
erection has, in more instances than one, become indispensable, and such
necessity, it is hoped, may recur again and again; it is certainly due
to those liberal persons, who thus aid the cause of the Redeemer,
distinctly and gratefully to acknowledge their Christian benevolence.

                          _To the_ SECRETARY.
                                            _Ballina, March 19, 1835._

My dear Brother,

In this packet, I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your kind favour of
the 10th instant, and herewith forward to you the Journal of the Readers
for the past month, as also the account of schools, &c., for the present
quarter. I have also to acknowledge the receipt of several sums of
money, towards the liquidation of the debt upon the Meeting-house in
this town, which you will find upon another part of this sheet. The sum
actually expended is now L328 10s., and the contract for finishing, L91
10s., making in all L420. Of this I have received, clear of expenses,
L232, for which, as well as for the acts of personal kindness shown to
me when in England, I beg, through the medium of the Chronicle, to
present my warmest thanks. I had hoped to have heard, ere this, what sum
the Building Fund, on which this case has been admitted, was likely to
produce. My best thanks are due to Mrs. Holland, of Bristol, especially,
who kindly, and without any solicitation, forwarded us L5. If some of
our wealthy friends in England, bearing in mind how injurious it must be
for an individual to be absent for any length of time from a missionary
station, and an infant cause, would imitate her example, it would not
only confer a personal favour, but essentially serve the interests of
the Redeemer's kingdom in this place. The trust deed, by which the
property has been made over to the Baptist denomination, has been
examined by the respectable solicitor of the London Building Fund, and
is approved.

It is in your recollection, probably, that the late Government ordered,
some time before they left office, a new census of the population of
Ireland; in which was to be shown the relative numbers of Protestants,
Roman Catholics, and Dissenters; as also the number and kind of schools
in each union or parish. One of the Commissioners was here on Tuesday
last, and, as a proof of the awful extent to which superstition
prevails, it appeared, soon after an amended census had been produced
and sworn to, by the Protestant clergyman, that not more than one out of
thirty, in this large union, can be considered even as nominal
Protestants. And, in a conversation with the priest, on the following
day, as a confirmation of what I have frequently stated, "I am perfectly
sure," said he, "that if you go round any day to all your schools, and
ours, and the minister's, you will not find in the whole of them 100
poor Protestant children." In the examination of our schools, before the
commissioners, though we have invariably insisted upon the introduction
of the Scriptures, yet they were scarcely inferior to any, and, in the
general, superior to most, both in numbers and regular attendance. Let
it not be said in future, then that the Roman Catholics, the children of
whom compose the bulk of our scholars, would not, unless violently
opposed by the priesthood, be anxious to possess and study the word of
God. And let our friends, whilst they have it upon the testimony of the
priest himself, that it is his flock we are educating in our schools,
be more earnest and zealous in this good cause; hoping and praying
thatthrough the instrumentality of these schools, the present race of
children may be delivered from the superstition of their fathers.

I have, since my return, preached at Easky, Mullifarry, and Crossmolina;
at the two former places to large and attentive audiences. The people on
all sides are exceedingly desirous to hear. On Sunday last, I again
administered the ordinance of Baptism in Ballina. The Lord, I trust, is
preparing others to submit to the dictates of his blessed word. Oh that
he would make us, who are engaged in this blessed work, more humble,
circumspect, watchful, and zealous! and then we might hope for larger
and more extensive success. Pray for us, that the word of the Lord may
have free course and be glorified.

I am, dear Sir, affectionately your's,
                                                          JAMES ALLEN.

       *       *       *       *       *

             _To the_ SECRETARY OF THE BAPTIST IRISH SOCIETY.
                                         _Limerick, March 20th, 1835._

My dear Sir,

I just returned from Croagh, about sixteen miles from here, in the
county of Limerick, to inspect the Koppel-street school; the poor
children were delighted to see me, and I was greatly pleased to see them
go through their school discipline with such precision and order. They
spelled remarkably well in three different ways. I am not aware that you
are acquainted with the plan of spelling and reading, particularly
spelling, which I have devised long since, which arrests the undeviating
attention of the children, and almost wonderfully facilitates their
progress. A fine testament class of 36 got up and read, in general, very
well, and repeated 224 chapters, which they committed to memory since
the last quarterly inspection. There are 148 on the list, 98 spelling,
50 reading the scriptures, 8 protestants and 4 reformed, who are the
master's children, of whose attention to his school, and good conduct,
I cannot say too much; He is also a sabbath reader, and, I believe, very
useful. A number of the girls got before me to the door, and requested a
female school; they showed me some very nice work, taught them by the
master's daughter. I said I would lay their request before their friends
in England. The progress some of them made in writing and figures rather
surprised me: the little premiums I gave them the last time had a great
effect upon them, in removing prejudice, and convincing them who their
real friends are, and in winning their affections to the love of the
truth, in spite of priestly influence. The countenances of the children,
in all the schools, brighten up, and smile, when they see me. I lectured
in the evening, at Finchley, the seat of their worthy and pious patrons,
Mr. and Mrs. Finch, who pay for a good school-house for them, and
subscribe to the society. The society has done inconceivable good. How
much more if it had sufficient means!

I was going to say, the Bristol school, at Balleycar, county of Clare,
sixteen miles north west from Limerick, is a tremendous one. I went
there immediately after my last communication; gave several lectures to
Roman Catholics and Protestants, in the house of our afflicted friend,
Major Colpoys; I tried to comfort and encourage his mind in the prospect
of eternity--he is "looking unto Jesus." The school is in a very
flourishing state; 224 on the list, 146 present, 120 spelling, 104
reading the Scriptures; about 30 committed to memory, and repeated 153
chapters this quarter: they made great progress also in writing and
figures, which they are very fond of learning. There are only two or
three Protestant children in this school. It often excites the warmest
gratitude in my heart to God, that has put it into the hearts of his
people, to afford such great and important blessings to those who would
perish in ignorance and superstition. Oh what a mercy to see so many
children rise to read the word of life, and to commit it to memory, and
read it in the hearing of their poor benighted parents! At the close of
the examinations I give a little lecture on the advantages of a
Scripture education, on the love of God, on the sufferings of the
Saviour, and on the influence of the Holy Spirit, to bless all to their
present benefit, and eternal salvation. I find I can say a great deal,
and go a great length, without endangering the schools, which I know,
and am informed, would not be borne with from others. I try, also, to
impress their minds with gratitude to their kind friends in England, and
they appear very grateful and pray for them.

The Seven Oaks school, at Bushy Park, county of Tipperary, about
thirty-five English miles north east from Limerick is in a prosperous
state: the number of chapters the children repeat from memory frequently
surprises me: the children of a poor Baptist brother there, near Burris
O' Kane, are mighty in the Scriptures. The school discipline gave me
great satisfaction, and the spelling, reading, writing, and figures,
very pleasing: 74 on the list, 66 present; 62 spelling, 12 reading the
Testament, and repeated 63 chapters from memory. The master is a very
inoffensive and attentive man; I trust, truly pious.

In the Mary's Philanthropic school, Mount Shannon, county of Galway,
about thirty-five English miles from Limerick, north north east, there
are 98 on the list; 60 present, 39 spelling, 21 reading the Testament,
and repeated from memory this quarter 150 chapters: always a good
school, having more very poor Protestants in that village and
neighbourhood than many others, and not so subject to vary from priestly
attacks as some others.

In the Norwich school, at Birr, fifty English miles east from Limerick,
56 gross; 34 spelling, 22 reading the Testament; they repeated 47
chapters from memory. It was not so numerous this quarter as usual, from
the extreme severity of the weather, and the nakedness and want of the
children, still it is a good school, and taught by a worthy, pious, poor
woman, with a large family.

The Cardigan school, at Kilbaron, is doing as well as could be expected,
from the unceasing exertions of the priest there, more than usually
excited in consequence of obtaining a complete victory over his champion
in controversy, in presence of a number of people. The master was a very
intelligent, clever man.

My dear Sir, your time and mine would not admit of my writing an account
of each school under my superintendence. I send the quarterly statement,
in which you see them with one view. The above I send for the
satisfaction of those kind friends who support or contribute to the
congregational schools. I also want time, and, indeed, inclination, to
give any statement of my own humble labours. Though the weather has been
extremely severe, since the 1st of February, I have been out the greater
part of the time, and preached in very distant places, and in various
counties, and sometimes under very trying circumstances. I preached at
Benagher, King's county, sixty miles from Limerick, twice to the house
full, at Walshpark, after travelling fifty miles, and preaching
and administering the ordinance at Cloughjordan; gave a lecture at
Ormandview, county of Galway; preached at O'Brien's Bridge, and several
times at Castle Connell.

                                   Ever yours, most affectionately,
                                                       WILLIAM THOMAS.

       *       *       *       *       *

                          _To the_ SECRETARY.
                                          _Ballina, March 20th, 1835._

My dear Sir,

I shall feel obliged to you, at your earliest convenience, to
acknowledge the receipt of the following articles, kindly sent for the
schools in this district.

A box of articles collected by Mrs. Thomas Allen, Birmingham, containing
two packets of books from Mr. Groom; some tracts, workbags, &c. from
Mrs. Glover and Miss Mansfield, Spring Hill; books, rug-worsted, and
patterns, from Mrs. S. Cocks, Camp Hill; a small round stand, from Ann
Husband; pin-cushions, from Mrs. Rogers, Bull-street; canvass, from Mrs.
Johnson, Deritend; cotton-balls, from Mrs. Warner; patchwork, from Mrs.
White; a blue bag, from Miss R. Simmons; a number of small books, from a
"Well-wishing Friend to Ireland;" and numerous little rewards, from Mr.
Thomas Allen and family; and from Rev. J. Smith and Sons, Astwood, 1000
needles. Since the above articles were kindly forwarded to me, Mr. Allen
has received a parcel from Mr. West, containing some useful books, from
"Dorcas," for the Library at Ballina; a parcel of books from Mrs.
Hawkins, Stroud; and a number of pin-cushions, balls of rug-worsted, and
a few workbags, and boxes of little fancy articles.

N. B. I regret to say, that in the last acknowledgment of articles from
Birmingham, I omitted to mention some poetical cards, kindly sent by Mr.
F. Deakin. The pair of six-inch globes, kindly offered by Mr. Mogridge,
and the patchwork by Mrs. White, will be very acceptable; and if sent to
Rev. J. West, 26, Little James's street, Dublin, will be forwarded by
him to Ballina as soon as he has an opportunity of sending them.

Wishing you every blessing, both of a spiritual and temporal nature,

                                   I remain, my dear Sir,
                                         Yours very respectfully,
                                                              A. CAVE.


                            CONTRIBUTIONS.


By Rev. J. Dyer:
                                                            L  s. d.
  Haworth, first Church, by Rev. Jas. Flood                 3  0  0
  Friend in Somersetshire                                   1  0  0

By the Secretary:

  "A Friend to Missions," by the General Post               5  0  0
  "A small per centage, upon last year's profits," do.      5  0  0

By the Treasurer:

  E. D., by W. Cozens, Esq.                                10  0  0
  For the Rye School, by Mrs. Crosskey, Treasurer           5  0  0

Collected by the Rev. S. Davis, for the Society:

  At Devizes                                               11  5  0
     Downton                                                6  9  0
     Romsey                                                 3 12  2
     Stockbridge                                            2  0  0
     Andover                                                4  9  6
     Whitchurch                                             4  9  6
     Newbury                                               15  2  0
     Abingdon                                               3  0  0
     Farringdon                                             2 10  0
     Fairford                                               0 10  0
     Circencester                                           8  5  6
     Tewkesbury                                            13 17 11
     Cheltenham                                            13 14  6

	       *       *       *       *       *

                        BALLINA BAPTIST CHAPEL.

    _An account of Money collected for this purpose, by Mr. Allen,
    in 1833, 1834, and 1835._

                                                            L  s. d.
  Ballina                                                  45 10  0
  Sligo                                                    12 18  6
  Dublin                                                   26  3  0
  Birmingham                                               14  6  0
  St. Albans                                                4  0  0
  London                                                    7  5  0
  Arnsby                                                    2  0  0
  Oadby                                                     1 13  0
  Guilsborough                                              1  0  0
  Naseby                                                    0 16  0
  Clipstone                                                 1 14  6
  Theddinworth                                              1  0  0
  Bugbrook                                                  3  6  0
  Kettering                                                 6 11  6
  Cambridge                                                 3  0  0
  Market Harborough                                         1  0  0
  St. Ives                                                  2  4  0
  Thrapstone                                                2 19  6
  Leicester                                                13 18  0
  Coventry                                                  7 11  3
  Leamington                                                0  5  0
  Stratford-on-Avon                                         3 16  0
  Alcester                                                  2  9  6
  Astwood                                                   2  8 10
  Pershore                                                  2  7  6
  Worcester, with friends from Bourton                      6  9  0
  Bilston                                                   3  7  6
  Coseley                                                   0 16  6
  Dudley                                                    1  2  6
  Bradford                                                 18 18  6
  Leeds                                                     6 15  0
  Middleton Teesdale                                        4 10  0
  Hamsterley, Rev. Mr. D.                                   0  5  0
  Romalkirk                                                 1  0  0
  Barnard Castle                                            1  0  0
  Stockton                                                  7  5  0
  Darlington                                                8 16  0
  Manchester                                               19  8  6
  Saladine Nook                                            12  0  0
  Liverpool                                                16  8  6
  Bristol, Mrs. Holland, per Rev. S. Davis                  5  0  0

Subscriptions received by S. Marshall, Esq., 181, High Holborn; Mr.
P. Millard, Bishopsgate Street; Messrs. Burks, 56 Lothbury; Rev. G.
Pritchard, 4 York Place, Pentonville, gratuitous Secretary; by Messrs.
Ladbrokes and Co., Bankers, Bank Buildings; by Mr. H. D. Dickie, 13 Bank
Street, and Rev. Mr. Innes, Frederick Street, Edinburgh; and P. Brown,
Esq., Cardigan.

         LONDON: J. HADDON, PRINTER, CASTLE-STREET, FINSBURY.




                          MISSIONARY HERALD.
                          CXCVII. MAY, 1835.


The Treasurers of Auxiliary Societies, and other Friends who may have
Monies in hand on account of the Society, are respectfully reminded that
the Treasurer's account for the year will close on the 31st instant,
which renders it necessary that all payments intended to appear in the
Appendix to the next Report, should be made in the course of the present
month. It is requested, therefore, that the respective accounts may be
sent, properly balanced, to the Secretary, No. 6, Fen Court, Fenchurch
Street, accompanied by the list of Subscribers, &c., in alphabetical
order.

_Particular attention is solicited to this notice; for as all the
Society's accounts for the year are examined and audited, by the
gentlemen appointed for that purpose, in the first week in June, and the
Report will, it is expected, leave the press in a few days after the
Annual Meeting, it is clearly impossible that payments can be included,
or lists of particulars inserted, which come to hand after the time
specified._

The Committee have pleasure in stating that their esteemed brethren,
the Rev. SAMUEL SUMMERS, of Bristol, and the Rev. BENJAMIN GODWIN, of
Bradford, have engaged to preach the Sermons at our next Annual Meeting.
Full particulars, as usual, may be expected in our next Number.


                        FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE.


                                CUTWA.

From Mr. William Carey to the Secretary, dated Cutwa, October 26, 1834.

     I am sorry to find that it is a long time, and much longer than it
     ought to have been, since I wrote to you last. The only reason is,
     that I have had to go through much affliction. Mrs. Carey has been
     very ill at times, and I have not been well. Our beloved father has
     also been removed to a better state, and one or two others
     connected with the family. In such things, and at different times,
     has the Lord seen fit to afflict us; but the Lord is good, and his
     strokes are lighter than we have deserved; yea, all his ways are
     mercy.

     I am happy to say that since I wrote last the work of the Lord has
     been going on as usual. I think I have baptized eleven persons,
     some belonging to the Christian families, and some from the
     heathen. The Mella's have also been visited, and the surrounding
     villages as usual; great numbers of tracts and books have been
     distributed; people upon the whole have been very attentive. The
     native preachers are out almost every day, and are well received. I
     have now two inquirers; an Hindoo woman and a Mussulman man; how
     they may turn out I cannot say.


                                SOORY.

From Mr. Williamson to Mr. Dyer, dated Soory, October 14, 1834.

     You will be gratified to hear that we have been meeting with some
     little more encouragement of late. A short time ago I had the
     pleasure of baptizing seven persons; three young men, and four
     young women. They are all of Christian parentage. One young woman
     (a Miss W.) is the daughter of the head English writer at this
     station. After finishing her education in Calcutta, she returned
     with us to Beerbhoom, about three years ago; and was then a very
     thoughtless girl, but for some time past she seems to have
     undergone a decided change of mind. She has been in the habit of
     attending our English worship on Lord's day and Thursday evenings;
     and occasionally at other times. These opportunities, together with
     reading of religious books and tracts, and occasional converse with
     us, appear to have been blessed to her. I trust she has made a
     sincere profession of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and that she
     will continue to walk in him. All the others belong to our native
     Christians, and have given us reason to hope well concerning them.
     Two of the young men having received a superior education, may
     therefore be expected to be of more eminent service in this land of
     darkness.

     You will also be happy to learn that one of the highest or monitor
     class girls of the Central School, from conviction of the Christian
     being the only true religion, has given up her caste as a thing in
     her estimation of no value, and cast in her lot with the followers
     of Christ. A short time ago, when she first made known her
     intention, Mrs. W. examined her respecting her motives; she said
     that our shasters were good, and our people were good; and that she
     could not live among her relations, who were idolaters and
     drunkards, &c. When Mrs. W. again asked her whether she thought she
     would be better off by becoming a Christian, the girl replied that
     she was already sufficiently well provided for, and that her sole
     intention in becoming a Christian was to obtain salvation. The
     first time she came with the intention of giving up her caste
     (which was just as the noise of the doorga pooja commenced), her
     parents dragged her away, and watched her narrowly for a few days,
     during which period she had no opportunity of making her escape;
     but as soon as their vigilance relaxed a little, she improved the
     first opportunity granted her of regaining her liberty. Her father
     threw away all her books and tracts, and is highly displeased with
     me for having betrayed the trust he had reposed in me. The girl is
     about sixteen years of age, and is pretty well versed in the
     gospels and scripture history. She has been latterly under a
     Christian teacher, and was employed as a monitor, which accounts,
     in part, for her having remained so long in the school. Another
     girl, belonging to the same class has a good mind, we hear, to
     follow her example, but has not as yet been able to muster
     sufficient resolution. May the Lord draw her and many others to
     himself, with the cords of his divine love!

     Our three schools (Bengalee boys', Bengalee girls', and English
     school) were all lately examined by the ladies and gentlemen of the
     station, who, I am happy to inform you, expressed themselves highly
     gratified with the progress the children and youth had made during
     the year; particularly with that of the higher classes of the
     English school: one class, in the course of six months only, having
     made themselves perfectly masters of the principles of English
     Grammar. I am inclined to hope much from the English school. As for
     the two Bengalee schools, on account of what has lately taken
     place, I am afraid they will be much diminished for some time,
     especially the girls' school.

     To aid me in the great work of preaching the gospel among the
     heathen, I have now four native assistants, for whom I draw 25 Rs.
     in addition to my salary of 150 Rs. per month. They are out daily,
     morning and evening, in the neighbouring villages, preaching and
     distributing tracts. They tell me that prejudice is fast declining,
     and that they have had repeated proofs of the tracts they give away
     having been read. I always take one of them with me, in my daily
     visits to the bazar of this place, when we have generally a pretty
     good congregation of attentive hearers. The season for our more
     distant excursions is now approaching, and will allow us to extend
     on all sides our hitherto confined labours. May the Lord assist us
     faithfully and fully to make known his glorious gospel among those
     who are perishing for lack of knowledge, and make us the savour of
     life unto life, unto many precious souls! "The harvest truly is
     great, but the labourers are few."


                                JAVA.

In the following extract of a letter from Mr. Bruckner, dated Samarang,
November 12, 1834, our readers will observe an affecting allusion to the
massacre of two missionaries from the American board, who lately fell
victims to the revenge or the suspicions of the Battas, in the northern
parts of Sumatra. When our late friend, Mr. Burton, resided, for many
months, among the same people, he felt quite secure, and made long
journeys into the interior of the country. But the power is now wielded
by other than British hands; and we greatly fear the change will operate
as a very serious obstruction to the cause of the gospel in these
beautiful islands for many years to come. But we rejoice in the
assurance that every obstacle must in the end be surmounted; and in the
belief that events, in different parts of the world, are concurring to
hasten onward that blessed event.

     Since I wrote you last, I have drawn up another tract in Javanese,
     under the title, "The Son of God in the World." 1500 copies have
     been printed of it, as we had no more paper for a larger edition. A
     translation of this tract has been sent to the committee of the
     Tract Society. It is true the prohibitions, as to a free
     circulation of tracts among the native inhabitants of this island,
     have not yet fully been removed, although several applications have
     been made on this subject to the men in power. And this is rather a
     disappointment and an impediment to a more extensive communication
     of the principles of the gospel at large; yet a goodly number of
     tracts have found their way, notwithstanding, among the people. The
     power of darkness in this country appears so great, that it would
     quite dishearten me, were it not for Him who is with and in us, who
     is more powerful than he that is in the world. When I shall have
     the pleasure to see that this general darkness of ignorance as to
     divine things, and of superstition and sinful lusts, shall give way
     to the light of truth and godliness, is not for me to say; under
     present circumstances, this period seems to be still afar off. It
     would seem, however, as if the truth of the gospel was gaining
     ground: now and then instances appear of this. Last Sunday, when I
     went out among the natives, to take a New Testament to one who had
     asked me for it,--and when I had preached the gospel to two small
     companies of people, and was still walking about for some more,--I
     came to a house in which I saw several persons sitting together. I
     entered, and began a conversation on religion. One of them
     expressed soon his Mussulman sentiments, on the power and glory of
     Mahomed; that he was the person to whom we had to look, as he bore
     all things. I asked him, in return, if Mahomed were so powerful,
     how it came that he, even at this moment, was still lying in the
     dust? from which it was evident, added I, that he was no more than
     any common man. A young man who was present, and who had read some
     of the tracts, then took up the subject with him, and told him that
     Jesus was the All-powerful, which was evident from his having left
     the grave, and ascended to heaven, and would come again at the last
     day to raise all the dead from their graves. I wanted to apply the
     subject further to the consciences of the hearers, particularly to
     that of the first man, by proving that all men are in a most
     lamentable condition on account of their sins, and needed therefore
     an Almighty Saviour to save them. But this man had so much to tell,
     like one of old, of his own goodness, that all further reasoning
     with him on the subject seemed to be in vain.

     With all the weakening effects of the climate on my constitution,
     and which I have particularly felt already for some time on my
     lungs, God has enabled me to go out four or five times every week
     into the native villages; and although my endeavours do not produce
     the desired effects, yet I cannot persuade my mind that all the
     precious seed sown in this way will be lost.

     You will perhaps have heard of the dreadful event, before this,
     which has happened to two American missionaries, Messrs. Manson and
     Lyman, in Sumatra, among the Battas, now about two months ago.
     These good men went thither to explore the country. They fell in
     with a troop of wild Battas, on one of their excursions, who fired
     at them, and over-powered them. Mr. Lyman was wounded by a shot.
     They then began to cut off his arms and his legs, and ate him up.
     While they were doing this, he petitioned the cannibals to spare
     his brother Manson alive; but the following day he was cut to
     pieces and eaten, as also the interpreter whom they had brought
     with them. Their wives were still at Batavia when the news of their
     husbands arrived.

     Sumatra is still in a state of war; yet Padang, where Mr. Ward
     lives, seems to have been always safe. I have not had any letters
     from Mr. Ward for a considerable time: as far as I can hear, he is
     still well.

       *       *       *       *       *


                               JAMAICA.

Mr. Tinson, having met the other brethren at Falmouth early in February,
writes as follows on his return to Kingston. We are persuaded our
readers will be gratified by the deliberate and candid opinions
expressed by this experienced missionary. His letter is dated Feb. 25th,
1835.

     Since I last addressed you I have seen more of our mission field
     than I had ever before an opportunity of visiting. We found it not
     only gratifying, but profitable, thus to visit our brethren, who
     all appear to be faithfully labouring in the vineyard of Christ.
     From them we received much kindness, and returned home, after an
     absence of six weeks, with improved health and increased desire to
     labour for God, from witnessing what he is doing by his servants.
     Such intercourse, occasionally enjoyed, could hardly fail to
     promote brotherly love, stimulate to exertion, and strengthen our
     confidence in God, as we behold the triumphs of his truth.

     In my last I mentioned the desire manifested by many in Mr. Knibb's
     congregation to obtain the Scriptures, and the large attendance on
     religious worship. The same may be said of Montego Bay, and, in
     proportion, of other stations I had the privilege of visiting. I
     spent one sabbath at Lucea, and intended going to Savannah la Mar,
     but was prevented by the rain. Of the interesting services at
     Montego Bay and Falmouth, which took place on the 7th and 14th of
     this month, on laying the corner-stones of the new chapels, I need
     not write, as our brethren at those stations will send you all the
     particulars. On our way home we passed through Stewart Town,
     Brown's Town, and called at Jericho, brother Clarke's residence and
     principal station. I should have mentioned that we spent a night
     with brother Coultart; and in every place we were refreshed in
     seeing or hearing of the grace of God. I have more than once
     expressed my conviction that God is about to do some great work in
     this land. In this opinion I am confirmed by what he is doing. We
     know that He does nothing in vain; therefore to any person at all
     observant of Divine Providence, it must manifestly appear, that
     God's thoughts are thoughts of good and not of evil concerning the
     inhabitants of this country. Look at the noble gift of his word
     which he has recently sent to the people! Upwards of 40,000 copies
     of the New Testament and Psalms, now circulating, like so many
     streamlets of the water of life, through the whole length and
     breadth of the land! Then there is the desire to read, and to
     possess the word of God; the spirit of hearing, which prevails in
     almost every part of the island; the great accession of spiritual
     strength in the arrival of new missionaries--Episcopal, Methodists,
     Baptists, and Independents; and the preservation and increase of
     good men on the island. Mr. S., the rector of Lucea, mentioned a
     fact worth recording: that, during his residence in the colony of
     sixteen years, he had not lost, by death, one of his evangelical
     friends, which was the same as saying that not one had died; for he
     is a truly pious man himself, and consequently is acquainted with
     all the good men in the church throughout the island. He further
     stated, that several clergymen, who had never before manifested any
     concern for the spiritual welfare of the people, were now coming
     out as active and laborious helpers in the good cause. Surely, my
     dear Sir, these are signs of the times not to be overlooked.

       *       *       *       *       *


                            SOUTH AFRICA.

We adverted, in our last number, to the unexpected calamity which had
befallen the British possessions to the north-east of the Cape, towards
the end of last year, by a violent irruption of the Caffres. The
measures promptly taken by the governor have, we trust, proved effectual
to the preservation of Graham's Town; but the loss of life and property
in the surrounding district has been very serious. We have been favoured
with a communication, sent from a lady at Graaff Reinet to her mother in
this country, under date of 20th January last, which conveys a striking
picture of the scene; and as many of our readers are interested in that
colony, we avail ourselves of the permission to insert it for their
information.

                                    _Graaff Reinet, January 20, 1835._

       My dear Mother,

     As I cannot help thinking, that when news from this colony arrives
     in England, you will feel some anxiety about our state, I must tell
     you that we are plunged into the greatest distress and trouble by
     internal war. The Caffres have made an attack on the whole line of
     frontier, burning and destroying every thing before them, and
     murdering, in the most barbarous manner, the unhappy residents.
     They have done incalculable mischief; and should they not soon be
     stopped, the destruction of the colony is inevitable.

     On the 24th of December, 1834, we were made uneasy by a commando
     being called out to assist against the Caffres. But this was soon
     followed by the most distressing accounts I ever read. They first
     proceeded to murder all the men (and in some cases whole families),
     to plunder all the cattle, and burn the dwellings.

     On the 26th, news arrived from my dear children in Graham's Town,
     viz. A----, my eldest son, and G----, who, with her husband
     (Mr. D. Mahoney), were in the utmost anguish, his father and
     brother-in-law having been murdered under the following melancholy
     circumstances:--Mr. Mahoney, sen., had a fine farm near Graham's
     Town. His son-in-law, Mr. Henderson (a truly respectable young
     Scotchman, married to Mr. M.'s only daughter), had gone out with
     his wife and sweet family to spend the Christmas at the farm, and
     were to have been joined by my dear children and Mr. D. Mahoney. On
     the Monday preceding Christmas-day, Major O'Reilly advised Mr. M.
     sen., rather to bring his family into Graham's Town, as some cattle
     had been stolen, and the Caffres appeared in a disturbed state. He
     determined to follow this advice, and on Wednesday morning started
     for Graham's Town with his wife, their two grandchildren, Mr.
     Henderson, and a slave servant, Mr. M. sen. following the waggon
     himself on horseback. They had not gone more than a mile, when they
     were attacked by about twenty Caffres, who began stabbing poor
     Henderson: he had fifty assagais in his body! and the poor father
     shared the same fate. The old lady escaped with one child, and the
     slave woman with the other; and after wandering about, separately,
     thirty-one hours on foot, without food or water, having lost their
     way, they at length met at Graham's Town.

     This was only the beginning of sorrows; for every day's tidings are
     more dreadful. Graham's Town is totally surrounded, and every farm
     either destroyed or deserted. The most barbarous murders are
     continually committed.

     January 2nd. Our tidings are truly appalling. My poor children
     cannot come out to us. E---- is now near her confinement. Her dear
     little babe, with my son ----, are obliged to sleep in the church,
     or in flat-roofed houses near it, as they all concentrate, in order
     to be the better protected. All the men are under arms. This
     village has been stripped also. The few who remain are formed into
     patrols.

     The Caffres have extended themselves over the whole line of
     frontier from Uitenhage to the Winter Field. Somerset has been also
     in the same state of danger. Fort Beaufort, Wiltshire, Caffer's
     Drift, Gualana, Bathurst, and Salem, have been left to their mercy,
     having remained as long as resistance was of any avail. Those who
     are spared have escaped only with life: in short, I can give you no
     adequate description of our present distress. The outcry for
     provisions is grievous: no supplies can be sent in by the farmers;
     they have it not, nor could they send it in if they had. We have
     had no market here since December 22. The Bay, I believe, has as
     yet escaped. We hear that the governor and troops are on their way
     to the frontier. May God grant them success! On Sunday, Jan. 4, all
     the places of worship were closed till 9 o'clock at night. In St.
     George's church, the galleries being filled with women and
     children, and the body with the men (under arms), the minister read
     the thirty-seventh of Isaiah, and commented upon the most striking
     passages. I assure you my spirits sink within me when I reflect on
     the probable consequences. Oh, how much you have to be thankful for
     in happy England! Pray for us, that, amidst all the wreck of time
     and fortune, our minds may be stayed upon God. Believe me, without
     the consolations of religion I should be totally cast down; but
     although clouds and darkness are round about us, yet it is the Lord
     that reigneth. True, indeed, these dispensations of his providence
     are dark and mysterious. Why so many valuable lives are cut off,
     and such a dreadful blow is given to our poor countrymen, after
     fifteen years' hard labour, we know not. Many of the missionaries
     have been in the greatest danger. We have not heard of the murder
     of any of them; but all the English who lately traded with the
     Caffres have been murdered but one, who came out, and told the fate
     of the rest. He states that one who was sitting at breakfast with a
     missionary was dragged out and killed before his eyes. They have
     told the missionaries they may go if they will: they do not appear
     to intend to destroy them.

     The cattle they have already captured is beyond all belief. I wish
     we could get away as far as Cape Town: I shall never feel at peace
     on the frontiers again. My school had been very good, and I fondly
     hoped to be a little more comfortable; but we are again reminded
     that this is not our rest. The reflection on my last birthday was,
     "Hitherto the Lord hath helped me." On the retrospect I have much
     to be thankful for, and much cause to be humbled under his mighty
     hand. As to _ourselves_, we have not much reason to wish many days
     to be added to our lives; but we have still a large family
     dependant on our exertions, having yet seven to provide for. At all
     events, I trust I shall be resigned to the Lord's will.

     Since writing the above, another post has arrived. We have received
     news of the arrival of Colonel Smith. The Governor and troops have
     embarked for Algea Bay. He has placed us under martial law. Are you
     aware what that entails? No lights after 8 o'clock. If any
     disregard be paid to orders, or disaffection evinced, you must be
     tried by court-martial--flogged--or even shot! Our little village
     is as yet unattacked. Our streets are regularly patrolled. No shops
     are open but butchers' and bakers'--provisions are dreadfully
     dear--no money to be obtained--no courts of law open--no licenses
     have been granted this year, so neither beer, nor wine, nor spirits
     can be sold--and in the midst of all this distress my dear
     husband's health is visibly wasting. If, in addition to all my
     other troubles, he is to be removed, I know not how I shall be able
     to bear up, as I shall be totally destitute. Oh, that I was near
     enough to hear one word of consolation from your lips! I do now
     feel bitterly where I am--truly banished.

     Farewell, my dearest mother, pray for your afflicted daughter.


              LIST OF FOREIGN LETTERS LATELY RECEIVED.

  EAST INDIES  Rev. W. H. Pearce  Calcutta          Oct. 22.
               A. Leslie          Monghyr           Oct. 13.
               J. Williamson      Soory             Oct. 14.
               W. Carey           Cutwa             Oct. 26.
               John Lawrence      Digah             Nov. 22.
               G. Bruckner        Samarang          Nov. 12.
  WEST INDIES  H. C. Taylor       Spanish Town      Feb. 11.
               J. Clarke          Jericho           Feb. 26.
               T. F. Abbott       Lucea             Feb. 17.
               John Kingdon       Manchioneal       Feb. 21.
               W. Knibb           Falmouth          Feb. 24.
               T. Burchell        Montego Bay       Feb. 24.
               Walter Dendy       Salter's Hill     Feb. 16.
               Joshua Tinson      Kingston          Feb. 25, & March 6.
               F. Gardner           ditto           Feb. 26, & March 6.
               Joseph Burton      Nassau, N. P.     March 6.
               Joseph Bourn       Belize            Feb.  8.


                           HOME PROCEEDINGS.

In consequence of the lamented decease of our Missionary brother, Mr.
Pearson, the Committee have determined to send Mr. Ebenezer Quant to
the Bahamas, instead of Jamaica, as previously designed. Mr. Quant, who
is a native of Bury St. Edmunds, and has for some time been engaged in
ministerial labour in connexion with the church under the pastoral care
of the Rev. Cornelius Elven, was designated to foreign service at the
chapel in that town on Tuesday, March 24th. This commodious place of
worship, which will seat more than a thousand persons, was crowded in
every part, and the service of the evening proved deeply interesting.
Rev. W. Reynolds, of Sudbury, began with reading the Scriptures and
prayer. Mr. Quant then gave an account of his own religious experience,
and a brief statement of his doctrinal views; at the close of which
his respected pastor gave him the right hand of fellowship, and
congratulated him on his entrance into the office of a Christian
Missionary. Mr. Ellington, of West Row, offered up the designation
prayer; the charge was delivered by Mr. Elven, from 2 Tim. iv. 5; and
the service of the evening was closed in prayer by Mr. Fuller, of
Harston, nephew of the revered Andrew Fuller, of Kettering, and himself
uncle to our young Missionary brother. A passage to Nassau has been
engaged for Mr. and Mrs. Quant, by the Little Catherine, Captain Kopp,
and they are expected to sail in a few days.

Mr. William Shotton, late of Darlington, is also about to sail to
Kingston, with a view to take charge of the School at Spanish Town,
under the direction of Mr. Phillippo, and Mr. John Clark, a member of
the church at Devonshire Square, has been accepted as an assistant
Missionary for the same colony, and will probably be engaged in
connexion with Mr. Coultart, in the parish of St. Ann's.

These new efforts, as well as all preceding operations of the Society,
are earnestly commended to the supplications of all our Christian
friends.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Contributions received on account of the Baptist Missionary
    Society, from March 20, 1835, to April 20, 1835, not including
    individual subscriptions._

  Mitcham, collected by Mrs. Pratt                              2  2  0

  Princes Risborough, Missionary Association, by Mr. Hughes    13 16 10

  Perth, for Female Education, by Rev. R. Thompson              8  0  0

  Harpole, collected at Prayer-meeting, by Rev. W. Gray         2  0  0

  Cambridge, Ladies, by Mrs. Foster, Female Education          10  0  0

  Gosley, Rev. B. Hall and Friends                              2  0  0

  Leeds, Ladies, by Rev. J. Acworth, for Female Education       6 14  0

  Wilts. and East Somerset Auxiliary, by Mr. Anstie:--
    Bratton                                         11 14  3
    Devizes                                         31 16  7
    Do. by Miss Blackwell                            2  3  6
    Bradford                                        14  9  2
    Westbury                                         1  1  0
    Warminster, by Miss Jutson                       0 18  6
    Frome                                           50  9  0
    Beckington                                       1  5  0
    Laverton                                         7  6  1
    Corsham                                          3 10  0
    Crockerton                                       2  4  8
    Melksham                                        10  3  7
    Chippenham                                       5  0  0
                                                   ---------- 142  1  4

  Hunts. Auxiliary, by Mr. T. D. Paul:--
    St. Neot's                                       1 13  3
    Huntingdon                                       7 14  8
    St. Ives                                        62 12  6
    Bluntisham                                      38  6  0
    Somersham                                       16  6  0
    Ramsey                                           9  5  8
    Swavesey                                         2  6  5
                                                   ----------
                                                   137 18  7
  Previously remitted, &c.                         103 19 11
                                                   ----------  33 18  8

  Hull and East Riding Auxiliary, by
    J. Thornton, Esq.:--
    Hull                                            98 10 3
    Beverley                                         7 12 0
    Bishop Barton                                    7  7 7
    Hedon                                            1 11 0
    Burlington                                      20  9 7
    Cottingham                                       4  0 0
    Skidby                                           1  0 0
    Driffield                                        2 13 1
                                                   ---------- 143  3  6

  Beaulieu, Rev. J. B. Burt and friends, by Rev. B. H. Draper   5  0  0

  Leighton Buzzard, Friends, by Mr. T. Matthews                 4 11  3

  Bath, Collection at York-street, by Rev. E. Carey             7  2  6

  North of England Auxiliary, by Rev. R. Pengilly:--
    Berwick and Tweedmouth                           4  3  0
    Workington                                       4  7  0
    Sunderland                                       6  5  0
    Hetton                                           5  0  0
    Newcastle, sundries                              2  4  6
                                                   ----------  21 19  6

  Manchester, York-street Sabbath School,
                                          for _West Indies_     2  2  0
                                              _Schools_         2  2  0

  Yorkshire, collected on a Journey, by Rev. James Flood:--

    Stanningley                                      3  0  0
    Rawden                                           4 10  0
    Horsforth                                        5  4  0
    Bramley                                          7  4  5
    Bradford                                        22  0  9
    Gildersome                                       5 17  3
    Salendine Nook                                   6  0  0
    Bingley                                          1 17  6
    Keighley                                         2  5  0
    Haworth, 1st Church                             10  0  0
      Do. 2nd do.                                   17  9  1
    Batley, J. Burnley, Esq.                         2  0  0
                                                   ----------  87  5  0


                              DONATIONS.

  Rev. R. W. Sibthorp, _Ryde_, for Mrs. Coultart's School       2  2  0
  ---- Jaques, Esq.       do.        for        do.             2  2  0
  Miss Rust and Friends, _Greenwich_,
    for Mr. Phillippo's School                                  8  8  0
  Friend at _Leicester_, by Mr. Collier                         5  0  0
  S. P.                                                         1  0  0

                   _On Account of Jamaica Chapels._

  Farnham, Friends, by Mr. Bird                                 0  7  4


                          TO CORRESPONDENTS.

The thanks of the Committee are presented to Mr. Winks, of Leicester,
Editor of the Baptist Tract Magazine, for a valuable packet of
elementary books for Jamaica: as also to Mr. Carpenter, of Greenwich,
and Mr. Morris, of Morton Pinkney, for magazines, and other books. The
work-bags, &c., kindly forwarded by Esther W----, have been sent to
their destination, and will no doubt prove acceptable.

             J. HADDON, PRINTER, CASTLE STREET, FINSBURY.


[Transcriber's Notes:

Typesetting on this book was poor, especially with respect to
punctuation. All inconsistencies are as in the original.]





End of Project Gutenberg's The Baptist Magazine, Vol. 27, May 1835, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BAPTIST MAGAZINE, VOL. ***

***** This file should be named 40252.txt or 40252.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/2/5/40252/

Produced by Bryan Ness, Charlene Taylor and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
