The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol. 107,
July 28th 1894, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol. 107, July 28th 1894

Author: Various

Editor: Sir Francis  Burnand

Release Date: August 15, 2012 [EBook #40509]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH, OR THE LONDON ***




Produced by Malcolm Farmer, Ernest Schaal, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









PUNCH, OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI.
VOL. 107.
JULY 28, 1894.


                 LORD ORMONT'S MATE AND MATEY'S AMINTA.

                          BY G***GE M*R*D*TH.

                               VOLUME I.

This was a school. Small wonder if the boys, doubly sensitive under a
supercilious head-master of laughter-moving invention, poised for a
moment on the to and fro of a needless knockabout jig-face with chin and
mouth all a-pucker for the inquisitive contest. The stout are candid
puff-balls blowing in an open sea of purposeless panting, hard to stir
into an elephantine surging from arm-chairs; and these are for
frock-coats, and they can wear watch-chains. So these boys understood
it. MURAT here, MURAT there, MURAT everywhere, with SHALDERS a-burst at
the small end of a trumpet, cheeks rounded to the full note of an
usher's eulogy, like a roar and no mistake, arduous in the moment,
throbbing beneath a schoolmaster's threadbare waistcoat, a heart all
dandelions to the plucker, yellow on top with white shifts for
feather-fringe; or a daisy, transferring petulance on a bath-chair
wheezing and groaning--on the swing for the capture of a fare--or shall
it be a fair, that too a wheeze permitted to propriety hoist on a flaxy,
grinning chub. This was SHALDERS.

Lady CHARLOTTE EGLETT appeared. Hers was the brother, the Lord ORMONT we
know, a general of cavalry not a doubt, all sabretache, spurs and
plumes, dashing away into a Hindoo desert like the soldier he is, a born
man sword in fist. She wrote, "Come to me. He is said to be married."

He spoke to her. "My father was a soldier."

"He too?" she interposed.

Their eyes clashed.

"You are the tutor for me," she added.

"For your grandson," corrected he.

It was a bargain. They struck it. She glanced right and left, showing
the town-bred tutor her hedges at the canter along the main road of her
scheme.

                             [Illustration]

His admiration of the cavalry-brother rose to a fever-point. Not good
with the pen, Lady CHARLOTTE opined; hard to beat at a sword-thrust,
thought MATEY. "Be his pen-holder," put in the lady. "I _would_," said
he, smiling again. She split sides, convulsed in a take-offish murmur, a
roll here, a roll there, rib-tickling with eyes goggling on the
forefront of a sentence all rags, tags, and splutters like a
jerry-builder gaping at a waste land pegged out in plots, foundations on
the dig, and auctioneer prowling hither thither, hammer ready for the
"gone" which shall spin a nobody's land into a somebody's money passing
over counter or otherwise pocket to pocket, full to empty or almost
empty, with a mowling choke-spark of a batter-foot all quills for the
bean-feast. So they understood it.

MATEY then was Lord ORMONT'S secretary. A sad dog his Lordship; all the
women on bended knees to his glory. Who shall own him? What cares he so
it be a petticoat? For women go the helter-skelter pace; head-first they
plunge or kick like barking cuckoos. You can tether them with a dab for
Sir FRANCIS JEUNE. He will charge a jury to the right-about of a
crapulous fallow-ball, stiff as Rhadamanthus eyeing the tremblers. But
MATEY had met this one before. Memories came pouring. He gazed. Was she,
in truth, Lord ORMONT'S? The thought spanked him in the face. A wife?
Possibly. And with an aunt--AMINTA'S aunt. She has a nose like a trout
skimming a river for flies, then rises a minute and you not there,
always too late with rod and line for sport. But there was danger to
these two, and Lord ORMONT was writing his Memoirs. A mad splashing of
unnecessary ink on the foolscap made for his head, never more to wear
the plumed cocked hat in a clash of thunder-bearing squadrons.

                             END OF VOL. I.

                               * * * * *

                       A VADE MECUM FOR THE NAVAL
                              MANOEUVRES.

                      (_Compiled by a Pessimist._)

_Question._ Will the Naval Manoeuvres of 1894 have any novel features?

_Answer._ Only in the imagination of the special correspondents.

_Q._ Will there be the customary coloured fleets?

_A._ Yes, with the usual commanders, officers and men.

_Q._ Will the lesson that a fleet having speed equal to a pursuing
fleet, if given a start, will escape, be taught to all concerned?

_A._ Yes, to the great admiration of the authorities at Somerset House
and Whitehall.

_Q._ Will it be demonstrated that if a town on the coast is left
undefended, a hostile ironclad will be able to bombard it at pleasure?

_A._ Yes, to the satisfaction of every scientist in the United Kingdom.

_Q._ Will it also be made clear to the meanest comprehension that if the
night is sufficiently dark, and search-lights insufficient, a fleet will
get out of a harbour in spite of considerable opposition?

_A._ Yes, to the great appreciation of the world at large, and the
British public in particular.

_Q._ Will there be the customary secrecy about self-evident facts and
trivial details?

_A._ Yes, to the annoyance of the newspaper correspondents, and the
indignation of editors thirsting for copy.

_Q._ And, lastly, how may the Naval Manoeuvres be appropriately defined?

_A._ As the means of obtaining the minimum of information at the maximum
of expense.

                               * * * * *

                          A PAINFUL POSITION.

                  It is my base biographer
                    I've haunted all day long.
                  He's writing out my character,
                    And every word is wrong.

                  With the wrong vices I'm indued,
                    And the wrong virtues too;
                  My motives he has misconstrued
                    As only he could do.

                  I read the copy sheet by sheet
                    As it issues from his pen,
                  And this, this travesty complete
                    Will be my doom from men!

                  I've wrestled hard with psychic force--
                    It is in vain, in vain!
                  His nerves were ever tough and coarse,
                    Impervious his brain.

                  Ah, could a merely psychic spell
                    Ignite an earthly match!
                  Or could a hand impalpable
                    Material "copy" snatch!

                  I'm as incompetent as mist
                    The enemy to rack.
                  Ah, if a spiritual fist
                    An earthly eye could black!

                  A paper-weight it lies below,
                    It cannot be dispersed!
                  The publisher will never know
                    _Who_ read that copy first!

                  His gliding pen, for all my hate,
                    Has never gone awry;
                  "All rights reserved," they'll calmly state,
                    O'er me. And here am I!

                               * * * * *

                          GUESSES AT GOODWOOD.

(_By a Transatlantic Cousin, according to English ideas._)

That I shall get puppar to take me and mother down in real style.

That we will wake up sleepy old Europe, and show these insolent insulars
that we are above small potatos.

That I shall cut out the Britisher Misses, and make their mummars sit
up.

That I shall take care that luncheon is not neglected, and see that all
my party, like the omnibuses, are full inside.

That I shall think very small of the races, so long as I get my boxes of
gloves.

That I shall do credit to the best society of Boston and the seminaries
of New York by speaking through my nose a mixture of slang and nonsense.

That I shall call his Grace of Canterbury "Archbishop," and any owner of
strawberry leaves "Duke."

That I shall wear a gown trimmed with diamonds, and have my parasols
made of net and precious stones. That I shall conceal the fact that
puppar made his money out of the sale of wooden nutmegs and mother's
aunt was a laundress.

That I shall flirt with a Duke at the Races, marry him at St. George's,
and give up for ever the stars and stripes.

P.S. (_by a Transatlantic Cousin, according to American ideas_).--I
shall continue to wonder at an English girl's notions of her kinswomen
when there are so many charming specimens of refined Columbian
gentlewomen resettled in the old home of the Anglo-Saxon race.

                               * * * * *

[Illustration: "THE COURSE OF TRUE LOVE," &c.

SCENE--_Hounds on drag of Otter, which has turned up small tributary
stream._

_Miss Di (six feet in her stockings, to deeply-enamoured Curate, five
feet three in his, whom she has inveigled out Otter-hunting)._ "OH, DO
JUST PICK ME UP AND CARRY ME ACROSS. IT'S RATHER DEEP, DON'T YOU KNOW!"

                   [_The Rev. Spooner's sensations are somewhat mixed._]

                               * * * * *

[Illustration: "THE APPLE OF DISCORD; OR, WHICH IS THE LAUREATE?"

_Paris_ ... LORD R-S-B-RY. _Venus (a la Japonaise)_ ...
SIR EDW-N ARN-LD. _Juno_ ... L-W-S M-RR-S. _Minerva_ ... ALFR-D A-ST-N.]

                               * * * * *

                         THE APPLE OF DISCORD.

                   (_Modern Parliamentary Version._)

    [Replying to questions concerning the delay in filling up the
    post of Poet Laureate, Sir W. HARCOURT said, "This is a delicate
    question, and, amidst conflicting claims, I must shelter myself
    in the decency of the learned language, and I would reply,
    '_Poeta nascitur, non fit._' ... My hon. friend must remember
    what happened to the shepherd Paris when he had to award the
    apple, and the misfortunes which befel him and his
    partners--_spretaeque injuria formae_."]

                    _Unpoetical Statesman sings:_--

            I'm Paris the Shepherd, _pro tem._,
              And here are the three pseudo-goddesses!--
            Different, truly, from them
              Who appeared, without veils, skirts, or bodices,
            Unto oenone's false swain.
              Well, I've no oenone to wig me;
            _But_--at the first glance it's so plain,
              Paris can't give the fruit to--a pigmy.

            HERE? Ah! this must be she!
              A classico-Cambrian Juno!
            Propriety's pink _all_ must see;
              But what other claims has she? Few know!
            Dull decency's all very fine;
              She has a fine smack of the chapel;
            But, dash it, I still must decline
              To give Goddess Grundy the apple!

            I'm sure she's domestic and chaste,
              A virtuous, worthy old body;
            But--that's scarce a goddess's waist,
              Her tone, too, is--well, Eisteddfoddy.
            I fear, if I gave the award
              To this _ex_cellentest of old ladies,
            Apollo might send me--'twere hard!--
              To read one of her Epics--in Hades!

            Then Pallas! Well, Pallas looks proud,
              And I have no doubt might deserve a
            Big crown from a true Primrose crowd:
              But--she runs rather small for Minerva!
            Men _might_ mistake her for her owl.
              "Her rhymes," say swell Tories, "are rippin'!"
            But still, though the _Standard_ may scowl,
              I _can't_ award Pallas the pippin!

            And then Aphrodite! Oh my!
              In that dress she must feel rather freezy.
            There's confidence, though, in her eye,
              She is taking it quite Japanesy.
            That _musume_ smile's quite a fetch,
              And yet--I acknowledge--between us--
            (They'll call me a cold-blooded wretch)
              I _can't_ stand a Japanese Venus!

            And so "the Hesperian fruit"
              I must really reserve--for the present.
            Yes. Here will call me a brute,
              And Pallas say things most unpleasant,
            Aphrodite--won't _she_ give me beans!
              They all want the pippin--you bet it!
            To grab it each "goddess" quite means,
              And oh! don't they wish they may get it?

                               * * * * *

"The New Woman" (according to the type suggested by the 'Revolt
of the Daughters') should be known as "The Revolting Woman."

                               * * * * *

                      A BALLADE OF THREE VOLUMES.

                  O awful sentence that we read,
                  O news that really seems to stun,
                  For Messrs. MUDIE have decreed,
                  And also Messrs. SMITH AND SON,
                  Henceforth consistently to shun
                  The trilogies we value so,
                  And that, for thus the tidings run,
                  Three-volume novels are to go!

                  Reflect to what it soon must lead,
                  This rash reform which you've begun;
                  How can the novelist succeed
                  In packing tragedy and fun
                  Within the space of Volume One?
                  Already his returns are low,
                  Soon he'll be utterly undone--
                  Three-volume novels are to go!

                  And then for us, who humbly plead
                  For long romances deftly spun,
                  Will not these stern barbarians heed
                  Our concentrated malison?
                  Alas, your literary Hun
                  Nor sorrow nor remorse can know;
                  He cries in anger, "Simpleton,
                  Three-volume novels are to go!"

                                _Envoi._

                  Prince, writers' rights--forgive the pun--
                  And readers' too, forbid the blow;
                  Of triple pleasure there'll be none,
                  Three-volume novels are to go!

                               * * * * *

Mrs. R. says she "quite understands the truth of the ancient proverb
which says that 'the man who has a family has given sausages to
fortune.'"

                               * * * * *

                            LYRE AND LANCET.

                         (_A Story in Scenes._)

                    PART IV.--RUSHING TO CONCLUSIONS.


SCENE IV.--_A First-Class Compartment._

_Spurrell (to himself)._ Formidable old party opposite me in the furs!
Nice-looking girl over in the corner; not a patch on my EMMA, though!
Wonder why I catch 'em sampling me over their papers whenever I look up!
Can't be anything wrong with my turn out. Why, of course, they heard TOM
talk about my going down to Wyvern Court; think I'm a visitor there and
no end of a nob! Well, what snobs some people are, to be sure!

_Lady Cantire (to herself)._ So this is the young poet I made ALBINIA
ask to meet me. I can't be mistaken, I distinctly heard his friend
mention _Andromeda_. H'm, well, it's a comfort to find he's _clean!_
Have I read his poetry or not? I know I _had_ the book, because I
distinctly remember telling MAISIE she wasn't to read it--but--well,
that's of no consequence. He looks clever and quite respectable--not in
the least picturesque--which is fortunate. I was beginning to doubt
whether it was quite prudent to bring MAISIE; but I needn't have worried
myself.

_Lady Maisie (to herself)._ Here, actually in the same carriage! Does he
guess who _I_ am? Somehow----Well, he certainly _is_ different from what
I expected. I thought he would show more signs of having thought and
suffered; for he _must_ have suffered to write as he does. If Mamma knew
I had read his poems; that I had actually written to beg him not to
refuse Aunt ALBINIA'S invitation! He never wrote back. Of course I
didn't put my address; but still, he could have found out from the Red
Book if he'd cared. I'm rather glad now he _didn't_ care.

_Spurr. (to himself)._ Old girl seems as if she meant to be sociable;
better give her an opening. (_Aloud._) Hem! would you like the window
down an inch or two?

_Lady Cant._ Not on _my_ account, thank you.

_Spurr. (to himself)._ Broke the ice, anyway. (_Aloud._) Oh, _I_ don't
want it down, but some people are fond of fresh air.

_Lady Cant. (with a dignified little shiver)._ With a temperature as
glacial as it is in here! Surely not!

_Spurr._ Well, it _is_ chilly; been raw all day. (_To himself._) She
don't answer. I _haven't_ broken the ice.

                                   [_He produces a memorandum book._

_Lady Maisie (to herself)._ He hasn't said anything _very_ original yet.
So _nice_ of him not to pose! Oh, he's got a note-book; he's going to
compose a poem. How interesting!

    [Illustration: "He's going to compose a poem. How interesting!"]

_Spurr. (to himself)._ Yes, I'm all right if _Voluptuary_ wins the
Lincolnshire Handicap; lucky to get on at the price I did. When will the
weights come out for the City and Suburban? Let's see whether the Pink
'Un has anything about it.

                               [_He refers to the "Sporting Times."_

_Lady Maisie (to herself)._ The inspiration's stopped--_what_ a pity!
How odd of him to read the _Globe_! I thought he was a Democrat!

_Lady Cant._ MAISIE, there's quite a clever little notice in _Society
Snippets_ about the dance at SKYMPINGS last week. I'm sure I wonder how
they pick up these things; it quite bears out what I was told; says the
supper arrangements were "simply disgraceful; _no_ plovers' eggs, and
not nearly enough champagne; and what there was, undrinkable!" So _like_
poor dear Lady CHESEPARE; never _does_ do things like anybody else. I'm
sure _I've_ given her hints enough!

_Spurr. (to himself, with a suppressed grin)._ Wants to let me see _she_
knows some swells. Now _ain't_ that paltry?

_Lady Cant. (tendering the paper)._ Would you like to see it, MAISIE?
Just this hit here; where my finger is.

_Lady Maisie (to herself, flushing)._ I saw him smile. What _must_ he
think of us, with his splendid scorn for rank? (_Aloud._) No, thank you,
Mamma; such a wretched light to read by!

_Spurr. (to himself)._ Chance for _me_ to cut in! (_Aloud._) Beastly
light, isn't it? 'Pon my word, the company ought to provide us with a
dog and string apiece when we get out!

_Lady Cant. (bringing a pair of long-handled glasses to bear upon him)._
I happen to hold shares in this line. May I ask _why_ you consider a
provision of dogs and string at all the stations a necessary or
desirable expenditure?

_Spurr._ Oh--er--well, you know, I only meant, bring on _blindness_ and
that. Harmless attempt at a joke, that's all.

_Lady Cant._ I see. I scarcely expected that _you_ would condescend to
such weakness. I--ah--think you are going down to stay at Wyvern for a
few days, are you not?

_Spurr (to himself)._ I was right. What TOM said _did_ fetch the old
girl; no harm in humouring her a bit. (_Aloud._) Yes--oh yes,
they--aw--wanted me to run down when I could.

_Lady Cant._ I heard they were expecting you. You will find Wyvern a
pleasant house--for a short visit.

_Spurr (to himself). She_ heard! Oh, she wants to kid me she knows the
CULVERINS. Rats! (_Aloud._) Shall I, though? I daresay.

_Lady Cant._ Lady CULVERIN is a very sweet woman; a little limited,
perhaps, not intellectual, or quite what one would call the _grande
dame_; but perhaps _that_ could scarcely be expected.

_Spurr. (vaguely)._ Oh, of course not--no. (_To himself._) If she
bluffs, so can I! (_Aloud._) It's funny your turning out to be an
acquaintance of Lady C.'s, though.

_Lady Cant._ You think so? But I should hardly call myself an
_acquaintance_.

_Spurr. (to himself)._ Old cat's trying to back out of it now; she
_shan't_, though! (_Aloud._) Oh, then I suppose you know Sir RUPERT
best?

_Lady Cant._ Yes, I certainly know Sir RUPERT better.

_Spurr. (to himself)._ Oh, you do, do you? We'll see. (_Aloud._) Nice
cheery old chap, Sir RUPERT, isn't he? I must tell him I travelled down
in the same carriage with a particular friend of his. (_To himself._)
That'll make her sit up!

_Lady Cant._ Oh, then you and my brother RUPERT have met already?

_Spurr. (aghast)._ Your brother! Sir RUPERT CULVERIN your----! Excuse
me--if I'd only known, I--I do assure you I never should have dreamt of
saying----!

_Lady Cant. (graciously)._ You've said nothing whatever to distress
yourself about. You couldn't possibly be expected to know who I was.
Perhaps I had better tell you at once that I am Lady CANTIRE, and this
is my daughter, Lady MAISIE MULL. (SPURRELL _returns_ Lady MAISIE'S
_little bow in the deepest confusion._) We are going down to Wyvern too,
so I hope we shall very soon become better acquainted.

_Spurr. (to himself, overwhelmed)._ The deuce we shall! I _have_ got
myself into a hole this time; I wish I could see my way well out of it!
Why on earth couldn't I hold my confounded tongue? I _shall_ look an ass
when I tell 'em.

                 [_He sits staring at them in silent embarrassment._

                SCENE V.--_A Second-Class Compartment._

_Undershell (to himself)._ Singularly attractive face this girl has; so
piquant and so refined! I can't help fancying she is studying me under
her eyelashes. She has remarkably bright eyes. Can she be interested in
me? does she expect me to talk to her? There are only she and I--but no,
just now I would rather be alone with my thoughts. This MAISIE MULL whom
I shall meet so soon; what is _she_ like, I wonder? I presume she is
unmarried. If I may judge from her artless little letter, she is young
and enthusiastic, and she is a passionate admirer of my verse; she is
longing to meet me. I suppose some men's vanity would be flattered by a
tribute like that. I think I must have none; for it leaves me strangely
cold. I did not even reply; it struck me that it would be difficult to
do so with any dignity, and she didn't tell me where to write to....
After all, how do I know that this will not end--like everything
else--in disillusion? Will not such crude girlish adoration pall upon me
in time? If she were exceptionally lovely; or say, even as charming as
this fair fellow-passenger of mine--why then, to be sure--but no,
something warns me that that is not to be. I shall find her plain,
sandy, freckled; she will render me ridiculous by her undiscriminating
gush.... Yes, I feel my heart sink more and more at the prospect of this
visit. Ah me!

                                                [_He sighs heavily._

_His Fellow Passenger (to herself)._ It's too silly to be sitting here
like a pair of images, considering that----(_Aloud._) I hope you aren't
feeling unwell?

_Und._ Thank you, no, not unwell. I was merely thinking.

_His Fellow P._ You don't seem very cheerful over it, I must say. I've
no wish to be inquisitive, but perhaps you're feeling a little
lowspirited about the place you're going to?

_Und._ I--I must confess I am rather dreading the prospect. How
wonderful that you should have guessed it!

_His Fellow P._ Oh, I've been through it myself. I'm just the same when
_I_ go down to a new place; feel a sort of sinking, you know, as if the
people were sure to be disagreeable, and I should never get on with
them.

_Und. Exactly_ my own sensations! If I could only be sure of finding
_one_ kindred spirit, one soul who would help and understand me. But I
daren't let myself hope even for that!

_His Fellow P._ Well, I wouldn't judge beforehand. The chances are
there'll be _somebody_ you can take to.

_Und. (to himself)._ What sympathy! What bright, cheerful common sense!
(_Aloud._) Do you know, you encourage me more than you can possibly
imagine!

_His Fellow P. (retreating)._ Oh, if you are going to take my remarks
like _that_, I shall be afraid to go on talking to you!

_Und. (with pathos)._ Don't--_don't_ be afraid to talk to me! If you
only knew the comfort you give! I have found life very sad, very
solitary. And true sympathy is so rare, so refreshing. I--I fear such an
appeal from a stranger may seem a little startling; it is true that
hitherto we have only exchanged a very few sentences; and yet already I
feel that we have something--much--in common. You can't be so cruel as
to let all intimacy cease here--it is quite tantalising enough that it
must end so soon. A very few more minutes, and this brief episode will
be only a memory; I shall have left the little green oasis far behind
me, and be facing the dreary desert once more--alone!

_His Fellow P. (laughing)._ Well, of all the uncomplimentary things! As
it happens, though, "the little green oasis"--as you're kind enough to
call me--_won't_ be left behind; not if it's aware of it! I think I
heard your friend mention Wyvern Court! Well, that's where _I_'m going.

_Und. (excitedly)._ You--_you_ are going to Wyvern Court! Why, then, you
must be----

                                               [_He checks himself._

_His Fellow P._ What were you going to say; _what_ must I be?

_Und. (to himself)._ There is no doubt about it; bright, independent
girl; gloves a trifle worn; travels second-class for economy; it must be
Miss MULL herself; her letter mentioned Lady CULVERIN as her aunt. A
poor relation, probably. She doesn't suspect that I am----I won't reveal
myself just yet; better let it dawn upon her gradually. (_Aloud._) Why,
I was only about to say, why then you must be going to the same house as
I am. How extremely fortunate a coincidence!

_His Fellow P._ We shall see. (_To herself._) What a funny little man;
such a flowery way of talking for a footman. Oh, but I forgot; he said
he _wasn't_ going to wear livery. Well, he _would_ look a sight in it!

                               * * * * *

[Illustration: PREVENTION BETTER THAN CURE.

"CAN YOU LET ME HAVE A BULLET-PROOF COAT FOR MY LITTLE DOG? MY NEXT-DOOR
NEIGHBOUR HAS THREATENED TO SHOOT HIM FOR BARKING!"]

                               * * * * *

WHERE TO SEND A YOUNG HORSE TO BE WELL BROKEN IN FOR RIDING.--Evidently
to the "Hackney Training Schools."

                               * * * * *

[Illustration: THE PERSONAL EQUATION.

"YOU'RE GOING TO DRIVE MY LADY TO REGENT STREET, AREN'T YOU, DICKON?"

"YES. IT'S HALL VERY WELL FOR _'ER LADYSHIP_ TO GO ABOUT IN A THING
LIKE THIS! SHE HAIN'T KNOWN IN THE WEST END. _HI HAM!_"]

                               * * * * *

[Illustration: "EVICTED TENANTS."

LOCAL VETO BILL. "ARE WE TO HAVE NO 'COMPENSATION FOR DISTURBANCE'?"

H-RC-RT. "YOU'LL SEE!--RE-INSTATEMENT!--NEXT SESSION!!"

                                       [_Exeunt Bills, dejectedly._]

                               * * * * *

                           "EVICTED TENANTS."

    ["It is impracticable to proceed in the present Session with
    some of the great measures to which the Government is pledged,
    such, for example, as that relating to the Church in Wales, the
    Registration Bill, and the Local Veto Bill."--_Sir William
    Harcourt._

                    _Little Local Veto, loquitur:_--

  Oh, exactly! Just what I expected! And after such volumes of talk!
  My prospects you told me were brilliant, and here it all ends--in
    a baulk!
  O, won't I just work up Sir WILFRID, and won't I just wake Mister
    CAINE?
  But there, you can't trust _anybody_, these times, that's
    exceedingly plain.
  And _you_ too, my own bringer-up, to turn _me_ out of house and of
    home!
  Oho, you unnatural parent! And where shall we wanderers roam--
  Poor Taffy, and young (Registration) Bill--look at him
    limping!--and Me?
  And the other ones tucked up inside, and especially that impudent
    Three,
  The Irish, the Scotch, and the London boys, whom you so favour and
    pet,
  Are laughing at us from the window. But, drat them, their turn may
    come yet.
  They may have to turn out, after all! BILLY BUDGET of course is
    all right,
  For you fought for your favourite che-ild, and, by Jingo, it _has_
    been a fight!
  But what have _I_ done to be rounded on? Call yourself boss of the
    place?
  Why, the BARTLEYS, and BOWLESES, and BOLTONS and BYRNES simply
    laugh in your face!
  What use to be landlord at all if you can't choose your tenants?
    Oh my!
  That odious Bung--one more B!--has the laugh of me still! I could
    cry--
  But I _won't_. I will kick! I'm not meek, like those other two
    poor little BILLS;
  Look, how limp and dejected they go, though against their poor
    dear little wills!
  But _I_ am not going to be put upon. I'll make it awkward all round.
  You won't treat me so any more; you won't "chuck" me again, I'll
    be bound.
  And what Compensation have I, for Disturbance? Eh! what's that you
    say?
  "All right?"--"Reinstatement--next year?"--"Pass away, my dears,
    please, pass away?"--
  Ah! it's all very fine to look pleasant and promise fair
    things--at the door;
  But that's regular constable blarney, old boy, and _you've done it
    before_!
  Meanwhile we're Evicted, worse luck! like the poor Irish Tenants
    whose case
  Those busy B's muster to fight over. Ah! you put on a bold face,
  But _we_ ain't the only Pill Garlics! No; some of 'em still left
    inside
  Will yet join us, out in the cold, as will p'raps be a pill to
    their pride!

                                               [_Exit with other Bills._

                               * * * * *

THE COLONEL AND THE QUIVER.--Our own Colonel SAUNDERSON, M.P., was never
better at his best than when, in the debate last Thursday night, he
said, "If the Bill passes, a quiver of horror will run through every
tenant, &c., &c." Of course the gallant Colonel meant "arrow" or "dart,"
not "quiver." A dart or an arrow will run through a person, piercing him
in front, and reappearing at back. But "quiver" doesn't do this sort of
thing. An arrow so transfixing a body may make it quiver--but this is
another matter. More power to the quivering elbow of the gallant
Colonel!

                               * * * * *

                          LA FEMME DE CLAUDE.

                When lovely woman stoops to folly,
                  You'll find, according to DUMAS,
                One certain cure for melancholy:--
                              _Tue-la!_

                French law, that damns you in the letter,
                  In spirit _change tout cela_;
                They always manage matters better
                              _La-bas._

                These are the lines to play the man on;
                  Take her defenceless, cry "_Hola!_"
                And trotting out the nimble cannon,
                              _Tue-la!_

                Or take for choice the common cartridge;
                  Pop goes _le p'tit fusil, comme ca_!
                You bag her neatly like a partridge
                              _La-bas._

                "_L'Homme-Femme_" may haunt the bosom British;
                  _La France_ goes trolling "_Ca ira!_"
                And waives the question with a skittish
                              "_Tue-la!_"

                No mutual recriminations,
                  No counterplea, _et cetera_;
                One solves too simply these equations
                              _La-bas._

                So runs the play. We saw you foot it
                  Featly therein, _la belle Sara!_
                You were all there, or, so to put it,
                              _Toute la._

                And now you go, and, if you'll let us,
                  Reluctantly we say "Ta-ta!"
                Come back again, and don't forget us
                              _La-bas._

                               * * * * *

THE NEW MOTTO (_by our own Irishman_).--England expects every man this
day to pay his own Death Duty.

                               * * * * *

[Illustration: A ROYAL PROGRESS.

SCENE--_Crossing in Rotten Row during the height of the Season. Two
Policemen stopping Riders. Little Girl, wheeling p'ram., with Baby
inside, about to cross._

_Mary Hanne._ "LOR', IT'S JUS' AS IF WE WOS THE QUEEN!"]

                               * * * * *

                            AIRS RESUMPTIVE.

                        I.--THE GARDEN OF SLOTH.

      [Illustration: A]t the Court of the Earl, by the meeting of ways,
      Man planted a garden, a garden that pays;
      In the thick of the crowd, where they tread on your corn,
      It is there that a singular plant has been born.
      Hot days of desire and cool nights of disgust,
      They are mine when its bud keeps refusing to bust.
      O, Wheel of my weal! I am waiting forlorn,
      I am waiting, I say, with a crush on my corn.

      In the "Garden of London" where night-lights are spread,
      I watch Living Pictures, as old as the dead;
      While a Tow-er Gigantic stands gruesome and glum,
      By the shadow of Shows that are certain to come.
      Will _they_ shoot as _I_ shoot on sixpenny slides?
      Will _they_ want as _I_ want rotatory rides?
      O, plant of a plant! I would barter my skin
      For the chance of Ixion his regular spin!

                               * * * * *

                           By Our Schoolboy.

_Q._ ([Greek: a]) Explain the allusion "Quorum Pars." ([Greek: b]) Give
reference.

_R._ "Quorum" is a bench of magistrates who must be all Fathers of
Families, or Pa's. Hence the expression (which is a kind of Latin pun)
"Quorum Pars." ([Greek: b]) The references are numerous, and all highly
respectable.

                               * * * * *

                           FOR ARMS OR ALMS?

An advertisement appears in a recent number of the _Athenaeum_, headed
"Devon Volunteer Commemoration," in which "Drawings are invited for a
memorial of the fact that the Volunteer Movement of 1852 originated in
Devonshire." According to the regulations, "Drawings must be accompanied
by tenders for carrying out the work." Moreover, "the total cost,
including all charges for designing, carrying out, superintending, and
erecting the work, and surrounding the same with a suitable iron
railing, must not exceed L200." Now this is really a very fair sum, and
to assist one of our readers to win the prize, we allot the money in
appropriate items. Of course we can only give a rough estimate, but it
should be near enough to suit its purpose.

          COST OF THE DEVON VOLUNTEER COMMEMORATION MEMORIAL.

        Design (being a sovereign more than the
          sum offered for a second prize)                6 0 0
        Stone                                           10 0 0
        Engraving inscription                           30 0 0
        Gilding the names of the Committee, &c.,
          engaged in the work                           50 0 0
        Designer's charge for carrying out,
          superintending and erecting work               4 0 0
        Balance (to be used for surrounding
          memorial "with a suitable iron railing")     100 0 0
                                                      -------
                                                      L200 0 0

And now, having shown how the thing may be done, we hope that
the best man may win. It is pleasant to find Art so greatly
appreciated in Devonshire--a county which apparently is as rich and
as generous as its own cream!

                               * * * * *

POST PRANDIAL.--If the geraniums and roses in my LOUISA'S garden could
speak, what celebrated dinner-giver would they name?--LOO! CULL US!

                               * * * * *

                        FAREWELL TO McGLADSTONE.

                   (_From the Heart of Midlothian._)

    ["I must here add, in explicit terms, the few decisive words to
    which, after all that has happened, I feel a natural reluctance
    to give utterance. It is not my intention, at the age I have now
    reached, to ask re-election (for Midlothian) when the present
    Parliament shall be dissolved."--_Mr. Gladstone's Farewell
    Letter to Midlothian._]

            [Illustration: AIR--"_Farewell to Mackenzie._"]

      Farewell to MCGLADSTONE, great Chief of the North!
      Midlothian remembers when first setting forth,
      The Chieftain she's mourning his course here began,
      Launching forth on wild billows his bark like a man,
      And stirring all hearts with his eloquent voice.--
      Farewell to MCGLADSTONE, the Chief of our choice!

      O swift was his galley, and hardy his crew,
      Her Captain was skilful, her mariners true.
      In danger undaunted, unwearied by toil,
      Though the storms might arise, and the billows might boil,
      In the wind and the warfare _he_ seemed to rejoice.--
      Farewell to MCGLADSTONE, the Chief of our choice!

      Blow bland on his parting, thou sweet southland gale!
      Like the sighs of his sailors breathe soft on his sail;
      Be prolong'd as regret that his vassals must know,
      Be fair as their faith, and sincere as their woe:
      Be so soft, and so fair, and so friendly of voice,
      Wafting homeward MCGLADSTONE, the Chief of our choice!

      He was pilot experienced, and trusty, and wise,
      To measure the seas, and to study the skies;
      He would hoist all her canvas on Victory's tack,
      Kind Heaven crowd it fuller when wafting him back
      To his home in far Hawarden, where hearts will rejoice
      To welcome MCGLADSTONE, the Chief of our choice.

      _Midlothian no more!_ 'Tis a sorrowful cry,
      And we gaze on the waves, and we glance at the sky;
      We shall long, when clouds darken and wild waves o'erwhelm,
      For his voice through the gale, for his hand on the helm.
      Now we shout through the shadows, with tears in our voice:
      Farewell to MCGLADSTONE, great Chief of our choice!

      _Midlothian no more!_ Faith, we fancy we hear
      The cry of the Chieftain who never knew fear,
      Stout still through its sadness, "Keep up the good fight!
      Let Midlothian, let Scotland, still stand for the Right!"
      The last burden brave of the valorous voice
      Of dauntless MCGLADSTONE, great Chief of our choice!

      _Midlothian no more!_ In despite, Chief, of all,
      The Heart of Midlothian responds to your call.
      Its echoes shall live, though no longer your form
      Shall steer us to sunshine, or cheer us in storm.
      Then farewell to the presence, but not to the voice
      Of "Auld WULLIE" GLADSTONE, great Chief of our choice!

                               * * * * *

                       THE COPPERATION AT WINSER.

Oh, didn't the grand old Copperation have a grand treat last week at
Winser! Her grashus Majesty the QUEEN asked 'em all down to her butiful
Pallace to hear the sollem Recorder read to her their joyful feelings at
the birth of her dear little Great Grand Son! And then, to the great joy
of all on 'em, Her MAJESTY read such a delishus arnser as amost brort
tears to the eyes of some of the young uns of the Party, and sent 'em
away to the butiful Lunshon Room to refresh exhorsted natur with a
delicate Lunch, and sum exkisit Madeary, such as King GEORGE THE FOURTH
is said to have saved xpressly for simmilar glorius ocasions.

Don't let it be supposed as I wants peeple to beleeve as I was there;
but I had the hole account given by one as was, and I ain't ixagerated
it not a bit.

There is a sertain Body of gents in London as ewidently wonts to play
fust fiddel in the guvernment of our grand old City, but I havent heard
of their being asked down to Winser Carsel to congratulate her Most
Grayshus MAGESTY on the late appy ewent. Should they be so I should most
suttenly make a pint of seeing 'em all start, if it were only out of
curiosity to see what sort of State Mazerine Gownds they would all wear!

I had allmost forgot to menshun that the two Sherryffs, and the Chairman
of the big Tower Bridge, was all benighted, and came out of the presents
Chamber smiling like ancient Cherubs. I am told as how as the
Copperation was so werry much delited with their royal wisit to royal
Winser, that they has been and passed a werry similer wote of thanks to
the Dook and Dutchess of YORK, and arsked them to receeve 'em jest the
same as the QUEEN did, but they is both werry sorry to say, that their
Pallis not being near so big as Her MAJESTY'S, they hopes as only a
small Deppytation of Aldermen and C. C.'s will attend.

Oh won't there be jest a rush for places, as every one on 'em is
naterally anxious to show his loyelty on so hinteresting an ocasion, tho
of course they carnt expec to have heverything exacly the same as they
had at Royel Winser.

                                                             ROBERT.

                               * * * * *

                              OPERA NOTES.

_Tuesday, July 17._--"The opera season will terminate July 30." To-night
VERDI'S opera of _Aida_, "with the dotlets on the _i_." First appearance
of Madame ADINI, a spacious _prima donna_ who amply fills the part.
GIULIA RAVOGLI an excellent _Amneris_. Opera apparently not particularly
attractive, or more powerful attractions elsewhere.

_Saturday, 21._--_Pagliacci_ followed by new opera entitled _The Lady of
Longford_, though it would have been more polite had the Pagliacci
allowed the Lady to precede them. But Pagliacci will be Pagliacci. _The
Lady_'s Librettists are Sir DRURIOLANUS POETICUS and Mr. F. E.
WEATHERLY. The music is by EMIL BACH. The Gentlemen of Longford are
represented by Messrs. ALVAREZ and EDOUARD DE RESZKE, while _the_ Lady,
the big lady, is EMMA EAMES--"quite the lady"--and the little lady is
EVELYN HUGHES. This new Lady turns out to be our old friend the one-act
drama by TOM TAYLOR entitled _A Sheep in Wolf's Clothing_, set to music,
the comic characters being omitted, and the end made tragic instead of
happy. The music does not entitle BACH to take a front seat. EMMA EAMES
excellent; FANNY HUGHES funny; ALVAREZ good; JEAN DE RESZKE first-rate
all-round-head Colonel, but more like a Cathedral than a Kirk. Composer
and Librettists complimented; MANCINELLI conducted; house full. General
satisfaction.

                               * * * * *

HARD CASE OF "EVICTED TENANTS" IN DRURY LANE.--At a general assembly of
the Theatre Royal Drury Lane Company of Proprietors last Wednesday, Mr.
CHITTY is reported to have observed that "after putting L300,000 into
the building without receiving a farthing in return, they were now to
have their money confiscated by the law, but in such circumstances as
one would not have expected from a nobleman in the Duke of BEDFORD'S
position." Ahem! Why did not Sir DRURIOLANUS arise and, remembering the
_Barber of Seville_, sing "CHITTY, CHITTY, _piano! piano!_" But
naturally the Drury Laneites must feel a bit hurt.

                               * * * * *

                          THE "GRAND NATIONAL"
                                 TRUST.

A Meeting has recently taken place at Grosvenor House to establish a
National Trust, the idea being to preserve places of historic interest
and natural beauty. Announced at the meeting that already a beautiful
cliff had been promised by a lady. We understand the following promises
have also been received:--

_The Duke of W-stm-nst-r._--A very handsome ground-rent. Intended to
support and sustain beautiful cliffs, &c.

_The Duke of D-v-nsh-re._--Ch-tsw-rth, which, owing to recent
legislation, he can no longer afford to keep up. Intends to take a small
cottage, it is believed, at some inexpensive town on the East Coast.
Several Distressed Dukes have also promised, on their death, to leave
their estates to the Trust.

_A Lover of Ozone._--A particularly bracing breeze. To be dedicated to
the public for ever.

_The London County Council._--The Shaftesbury Fountain. The L. C. C., we
understand, welcomes the prospect of handing over to the Trust the
responsibility attaching to this insoluble problem.

_A Hertfordshire Gentleman._--A thoroughly reliable right of way.

_Mr. Th-m-s B-ch-m._--A unique collection of signboards _in situ_. These
are placed in the midst of the most lovely natural scenery, and in
themselves will very soon, it is hoped, be of _historic_ interest.

_Sir Fr-d-r-ck P-ll-ck_ will arrange in every case to supply a good
title.

_Mr. Punch_ heartily commends so patriotic a scheme to his readers. Any
beautiful cliffs, ground-rents, rights of way, &c., sent to him at 85,
Fleet Street will immediately be forwarded to the proper quarter.
N.B.--It is just possible an exception to this rule might be made in the
case of ground-rents.

                               * * * * *

                            HOW IT IS DONE.

                           (_An Art-Recipe._)

            [Illustration: QUID EST PICTURA?--VERITAS FALSA.

            (Epictetus.)]

                  Take a lot of black triangles,
                    Some amorphous blobs of red;
                  Just a sprinkle of queer spangles,
                    An ill-drawn Medusa head;
                  Some red locks in Gorgon tangles,
                    And a scarlet sunshade, spread:
                  Take a "_portiere_" quaint and spotty,
                    Take a turn-up nose or two;
                  The loose lips of one "gone dotty,"
                    A cheese-cutter chin, askew;
                  Pose like that of front-row "TOTTIE,"
                    Hat as worn by "COSTER LOO";
                  Take an hour-glass waist, in section,
                    Shoulders hunched up camel-wise;
                  Give a look of introspection
                    (Or a squint) to two black eyes;
                  Or a glance of quaint dejection,
                    Or a glare of wild surprise;
                  Slab and slop them all together
                    With a background of sheer sludge;
                  (Like a slum in foggy weather),
                    And this blend of scrawl and smudge
                  Vend as ART--in highest feather!--
                  Dupes in praise will blare and blether.
                    Honest _Burchells_ will cry--"FUDGE!!!"

                               * * * * *

                         A Demi-French Octave.

                   (_Picked up in a Dressing-room._)

                My razor, you're a true  _raseur_,
                  That is, you bore me badly!
                You're blunt, you gash--_de tout mon coeur_
                  I _bless_ you wildly, madly!
                _Vraiment, c'est vous qu' j'ai en horreur_
                  Each morn on rising sadly;
                Were't not that shaving's _de rigueur_,
                  In turn I'd cut _you_ gladly!

                                 * * *

IN VIEW OF HOLIDAYS. A HINT.--Of course if you're on pedestrian tours
bent--if you're a bicyclist you'll be still more bent--you cannot do
better than, as a pedestrian, get WALKER'S Maps. If you are going to
sail, or by steam, you are again referred to----"WALKER, London." There
is a good idea in these Maps which might be still further developed, and
that is not only to show the route and the manner of making your
journey, but by arrangement with the principal Steam-boat and Railway
Companies some sort of "itinerary" might be added to the Map, with
information as to the "means whereby," which to the toiler in search of
a brief holiday "by rail, by river, or by sea," and perhaps by all
three, would be most useful were it available as an almost
"instantaneous process" of reference.

                                 * * *

                                BISLEY.

                          Pelt or drizzly,
                          Weather--_Bisley_!

                                 * * *

FINANCIAL PROBLEM (_the effect of reading the Budget Debates_).--Why is
the Income-Tax so sharply felt? Because, disguise it as you may, it's a
case of tin-tax!

                                 * * *

LONDON KNIGHT BY KNIGHT.--The SOLICITOR-GENERAL Knighted last Wednesday
at Windsor. Will BOB (the only name by which his many friends know him)
henceforth be known as "the Queen's Shilling"?

                               * * * * *

                           RANELAGH IN RAIN.

            How sweet this road is, fringed by hedgerow elm,
              Where peeps in May the hawthorn's snowy bud,
            A fairy place that seems _Titania's_ realm!
                         By Jove, what mud!

            How sweet this turf, as soft as finest moss!
              Such "_gazon anglais_" we alone can get.
            Oh hang it, no! I cannot walk across,
                         It's soaking wet!

            How sweet that lake, where gentle eddies play!
              But all around seems lake, through rainfall dim.
            Why want a pond, when on dry (!) land to-day
                         We almost swim?

            How sweet--to get a Hansom home again,
              And leave this aguish, rheumatic damp!
            I do not love thee, Ranelagh, in rain,
                         Beneath a gamp.

                               * * * * *

                        WHAT'S IN A NAME INDEED?

              "Edward, Albert, Christian, George,
                Andrew, Patrick, David,
              Drink life's pleasures with free gorge!
                From its pains be saved!"
              So said _Punch_ at the White Lodge,
                His old optics glistening,
              Sure such names ill-luck should dodge;
                Sure such names no babe e'er bore,
                Patron Saints! You've all the four
              To bless the Royal Christening!

                               * * * * *

A COMPANY THAT OUGHT TO "FLOAT."--"The Cork Company."

                               * * * * *

                         ESSENCE OF PARLIAMENT.

                 EXTRACTED FROM THE DIARY OF TOBY, M.P.

_House of Commons, Monday, July 16._--The Blameless B. is translated
into the Breathless BARTLEY. Of eleven pages of Amendments to Budget
Bill standing for consideration when House met to-day, not less than
three contributed by this particular B. Embodied readjusted scale of
graduated taxation. Only objections to it presently stated by SQUIRE OF
MALWOOD: (1) It would necessitate total reconstruction of Bill (2)
resulting in loss of L643,000; (3) whole question had been thoroughly
threshed out in Committee. To raise it again at eleventh hour seemed too
much to ask even in connection with Budget Bill.

Nevertheless BARTLEY, not yet breathless, moved his multitudinous
Amendment. Resumed his seat with consciousness of man who had done his
duty. The SQUIRE would get up to answer him; debate would follow; at
least two hours would be pleasantly occupied. Instead of SQUIRE,
ATTORNEY-GENERAL rose. "Well," said BLAMELESS, throwing himself into
attitude of attention, "let's hear what he has to say."

Turned out to be exceedingly little. "Government scale has been attacked
and defended many times," said ATTORNEY-GENERAL. "I do not think it
necessary to defend it again; but," here he leaned on the table with
engaging look at the now BREATHLESS BARTLEY, "the hon. gentleman can
take a division if he thinks fit."

BARTLEY sat and audibly gasped. JOKIM gallantly protested against this
treatment of his hon. friend; threatened to move adjournment of debate.
PRINCE ARTHUR sent for; arrived almost as breathless as BARTLEY; thunder
boomed, lightning flashed round head of ATTORNEY-GENERAL, who is always
finding himself astonished. "The hon. and learned gentleman," said
PRINCE ARTHUR, with delightful assumption of anger, "has abused the
situation. The Opposition have no means of compelling him to talk sense,
but talk he must."

SQUIRE OF MALWOOD, who had fled before prospect of long speech from
BARTLEY, hastily brought back. Don't know where incident would have
ended had it not been for KENYON-SLANEY. Finding opening he slipped in.
Threw himself into easy oratorical attitude; proposed to consider
principle of graduation adopted in Bill. Would do so under three heads:
injustice to the poor, injustice to the middle-class, injustice to the
rich.

This too much even for Opposition. With groans of despair they rushed
into Division Lobby; BARTLEY'S scheme negatived by majority of 62.

_Business done._--Budget Bill passed Report stage.

_Wednesday._--ST. JOHN BRODRICK sitting on front Opposition Bench
through Committee of Supply on Army Estimates this afternoon, invested
neighbourhood with unwonted air of fashion. Not that there is, as a
rule, any lack of style on part of Leaders of Opposition regarded as a
body. Only something, _je ne sais quoi_, about BRODRICK that suggested
profoundest depths of POOLE. Couldn't help complimenting him on his turn
out.

"Evidently you spare no expense," I said; "though why even a millionaire
should wear an overcoat a day like this seems wicked waste of property.
Hope you are not growing desperate in anticipation of Death Duties;
spending your money recklessly so that HARCOURT may be disappointed
when, for taxing purposes, he comes to aggregate your property?"

                [Illustration: "The Young Wales Party."]

"My dear boy," said BRODRICK, giving the overcoat a dexterous lift by
the lappels that added fresh grace to its fit at the back of the neck,
"you're out of it altogether. This is the thirteen-and-sixpenny coat
supplied to Tommy Atkins in which,--following the advice of Dr. JOHNSON,
wasn't it?--I, as I told the House the other day, took a walk down Bond
Street. The surtout underneath, which I will fully display when the
House gets a little fuller, cost seventeen-and-six net. You will observe
it is so made that you can button it across and so save a waistcoat. If
you must have a waistcoat, we can do it at eight-and-ninepence. As for
trousers, these cost me thirteen shillings." (Here he stretched out and
fondly regarded a manly leg.) "If I had taken a couple of pair, cut at
the same time you know, I could have had the two for 25_s._ I see your
eyes fixed on the boots. As you say, the shape of the foot may have
something to do with it. But apart from that, the article is equal to
what you pay thirty-five shillings for in Regent Street or Piccadilly.
Eleven-and-ninepence was the figure. Misfits, very popular with privates
newly joined, knock off the odd ninepence. Of course I don't wear this
suit every day. Can't afford that; put 'em on whenever House in
Committee on Army Supply or debate going forward on Army matters. It
encourages CAWMELL--BANNERMAN, you know; helps WOODALL in getting his
clothing vote; and, I believe, is rather liked by Tommy Atkins."

_Business done._--SQUIRE OF MALWOOD announces programme for remainder of
Session. A mere nothing. Only, as PRINCE ARTHUR says, in view of number
of Bills and their contentious character, more like what we are
accustomed to at beginning of Session, than to have dumped down in what
should be its last month.

_Thursday._--"JOSEPH," said the Member for SARK, dropping into one of
his tiresome didactic moods, "would do well in any circumstances.
Whether in Upper Egypt or Lower, he was sure to come to the top of the
well, however securely his brethren might have packed him in its lowest
depths. But, regarding him just now as he criticised the SQUIRE'S
arrangements for the Session, I could not help thinking what a loss the
auction-room has only partially survived by his turn into the field of
politics. If in early life, or even middle age, he had only taken to the
rostrum, the shade of the much over-rated ROBINS would have been dimmed
in glory. Observe how well he looks the part. See with what unconscious
effect he produces a stumpy piece of lead pencil, and looks round for
bids. Listen to the clear sharp notes of his voice. 'What shall we say,
gentlemen, for the Equalisation of Rates Bill? How many days will you
give for it? Name your own time, gentlemen. There is no reserve. Shall
we say six days? Does the tall, somewhat stout gentleman with a white
waistcoat, on the Treasury Bench, shake his head? Very well, we will say
four days. Going at four days;' and the pencil, scratching out six,
substitutes four. This may seem very easy when it's done; but it's art,
TOBY, even genius. If you think it's easy for a man discussing State
business, suddenly but completely to invest the high court of Parliament
with the tone and atmosphere of an auction-room, just reckon up how many
other men of first rank in public life could do it. Not to go further
afield, could PRINCE ARTHUR manage it, even after a week's training?
Very well; then don't minimise a successful effort because, thanks to
the commanding influence of native talent, its accomplishment seems easy
to a particular person."

_Business done._--HICKS-BEACH, complaining that Ministers have dropped a
large number of Bills for lack of time to pass them, and asserting that
the time remaining at their disposal for passing the poor balance is too
short, reduces it by three hours, in order that he and his friends may
lament the fact.

_Friday._--House heard with keen satisfaction that SZLUMPER is around
again. Not having seen in the newspapers any telegrams from him lately,
there was vague idea that he had succumbed to his exertions on occasion
of the happy event at White Lodge. Perhaps he was a little fatigued, for
SZLUMPER, in addition to being Mayor of Richmond, is almost human. No
man born of woman could with impunity fire off such a succession of
telegrams as on that memorable day SZLUMPER dealt out to his Sovereign,
the Heir Apparent to the Throne, the Crowned Heads of Europe, and his
ducal neighbours at the White Lodge. But on Royal Christening day
SZLUMPER was around again, with a little SZLUMPER carrying a bouquet of
flowers to be presented to the QUEEN, whilst SZLUMPER _pere_, plumped on
his knees, welcomed his Sovereign within the gateway of ancient
Richmond.

"_Ah, ce_ SZLUMPER!" said SARK, "he delights me more and more. He
represents, if you think of it, the essence of our English social life.
He is part of the foundation of the British Constitution, which
everyone, especially those regarding it from a distance, regards as the
perfection of good government."

_Business done._--A dull night speechmaking on Irish Evicted Tenants
Bill.

                               * * * * *

                      OXFORD AND YALE.--(JULY 16.)

        A very good fight! Come again to us, Yale!
        We know a true Yank knows not how to spell "fail."
        HICKOK and SHELDON can throw and can jump!
        And e'en in the racing you made our lads pump
        Come again, Yale, come again, and again;
        Victors or vanquished such visits aren't vain.
        One of these days you will probably nick us.
        We don't crow when we lick; we won't cry when you lick us!

                               * * * * *

Rise, Sir!

    "We are informed that the QUEEN has been pleased to confer the
    honour of a Baronetcy on Dr. JOHN WILLIAMS, of Brook Street. Dr.
    WILLIAMS is the Physician who attended the Duchess of
    YORK."--_Daily Paper, July 16._

We congratulate Sir JOHN, who is now a Sur-geon in every sense of the
word.




                           Transcriber Notes:

Passages in italics were indicated by _underscores_.

Small caps were replaced with ALL CAPS.

Throughout the document, the oe ligature was replaced with "oe".

Throughout the dialogues, there were words used to mimic accents of the
speakers. Those words were retained as-is.

The illustrations have been moved so that they do not break up
paragraphs and so that they are next to the text they illustrate.

Errors in punctuations and inconsistent hyphenation were not corrected
unless otherwise noted.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol.
107, July 28th 1894, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH, OR THE LONDON ***

***** This file should be named 40509.txt or 40509.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/5/0/40509/

Produced by Malcolm Farmer, Ernest Schaal, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
