Project Gutenberg's The Baptist Magazine, Vol. 27, June 1835, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Baptist Magazine, Vol. 27, June 1835

Author: Various

Editor: George  Wightman

Release Date: August 20, 2012 [EBook #40542]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BAPTIST MAGAZINE, VOL. ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, Charlene Taylor and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)





[Transcriber's Notes: Irregularities in spelling have been maintained,
as did the typesetters when setting the numerous correspondences.

The typesetting on this was poor, especially with respect to
punctuation.

Due to the number of tables, this file would read better in a monospaced
font.

Italics are designated with "_", small caps "=", bold "+".]




                                 THE
                          BAPTIST MAGAZINE.

                             -----------
                             JUNE, 1835.
                             -----------


            MEMOIR OF MR. ISAAC WYKE, LATE OF ABERGAVENNY.

=Mr. Isaac Wyke=, surgeon, late of Abergavenny, was born at Leominster,
July 25th, 1770. His parents were pious members of the Baptist Church in
that town, then under the pastoral care of the late Rev. Joshua Thomas.
They, therefore, led him in early life to attend on the ministry of
their worthy pastor, and trained him up in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord. Thus privileged, the importance of religion was often pressed
on his attention, and its excellence presented to his view; and he was
thereby preserved from many of the snares, the follies, and the sins
into which young persons, less favourably circumstanced, are often
hurried.

It was not, however, till his sixteenth year, that he appeared to be
truly renewed by the grace of God. Then he manifestly became a new
creature in Christ Jesus. With his whole heart he now devoted himself
to the Lord, was baptized by Mr. Thomas, and received into the church.
His subsequent disposition and conduct fully confirmed the sincerity of
his profession, adorned the doctrine of God our Saviour, and greatly
endeared him to his pastor and fellow-members. The lively zeal he
manifested in the prosperity of the church, his increasing spirituality,
and his active diligence in promoting its interests, soon induced his
brethren to choose him to the office of deacon, in connexion with his
pious father, who had been previously called by the church to that
important office. Instead, however, of being unduly elevated with the
honour of the post assigned him, his mind was solemnly impressed with
a sense of its responsibility. With deep humility, therefore,
faithfulness, and zeal, he applied himself to the discharge of its
duties, to the full satisfaction of his brethren, and the manifest
promotion of the peace and prosperity of the church, throughout the
several years of his subsequent residence in Leominster.

In February, 1803, as directed by Divine Providence, he removed with
his family to Abergavenny, where he spent the remainder of his life.
Here a new sphere was presented to engage his active zeal. Many were his
efforts to do good, nor were those efforts vain. In April, 1807, he and
Mrs. W. (his now surviving widow), with three other persons, were formed
into the first English Baptist Church, in Abergavenny; the Rev. M.
Thomas, who had recently resigned his charge at Ryeford, being pastor,
and Mr. Wyke, deacon--a feeble, but devoted band. His active zeal,
pecuniary contributions, and strenuous efforts were put under cheerful
requisition to foster this infant cause; and, through the blessing of
heaven, sinners were successively converted, and the church was edified
and increased. Mr. Wyke continued an honourable member and deacon of
this church about twenty years.

In 1827, however, he and Mrs. Wyke, with several other members, withdrew
from it; when they met for worship in a meeting-house which was kindly
lent them in another part of the town. Soon afterwards, circumstances
transpired that induced them to withdraw from this place also; and to
commence, in Lion Street, the bold undertaking of erecting a new house
for the worship of God. Mr. W. took the whole responsibility on himself;
and in July, 1828, a neat, substantial, and commodious meeting-house,
with suitable vestry and burial-ground, was completed. The Rev. Dr.
Steadman, of Bradford, who had been intimately acquainted with Mr. Wyke
from his earliest days, and the Rev. J. Edwards, now of Nottingham, a
native of Abergavenny, preached at the opening; and on the following
Lord's-day, a church of seventeen persons was organised, Mr. W. set
apart to the office of deacon, and the Lord's Supper administered by Dr.
Steadman. The property was invested in trust for the public; a mortgage
of L200 only being left on it; and with the exception of this sum, the
whole expense incurred was generously liquidated by Mr. Wyke. Long as
our worthy friend retained any capability of effort, he laid himself out
to promote this interest; and both the material building, and the
spiritual house, here cemented in Christian love, present a striking
monument of his liberality, and strenuous exertions to promote the cause
of his God and Saviour.

His religion was evidently the effect of genuine principle; of principle
the most salutary in its influence on his own mind, and therefore
practically exemplified in all the lovely graces that beautify and
adorn the Christian character. His religious sentiments were truly
evangelical. Guided by heaven's bright lamp of inspired truth, he
steered with the utmost caution the middle course, between the high
daring of Antinomian presumption on the one hand, and the delusive
quicksands of Arminian legality on the other. Christ to him was the
Alpha and Omega. The doctrines of grace he contemplated, not with a mere
speculative faith, or as so many propositions to constrain the cold
assent of his understanding; but as the wonderful disclosure of the
unutterable grace of God, giving life as well as light to the soul. The
cross of Christ was his ever favourite theme; and when listening to
discourses that strikingly portrayed the contrast of the moral
wretchedness of man, and the unparalleled love of God his Saviour, the
most intense interest was plainly pictured on his countenance; the
delight that pervaded his bosom constrained him to look around on his
fellow-worshippers with beaming eyes, that seemed to say to them, "See
how he loved us!" while his whole soul was manifestly absorbed in
wonder, love, and praise.

Actuated by such views and feelings, as well as by a warm desire to do
good, he preached occasionally for many years; principally in destitute
villages, where, but for his disinterested efforts, there would have
been no vision to direct perishing sinners to the Saviour; but often
also, with disinterested kindness for his own and other stated pastors,
whenever his services were called for. The reputation of his character
and the loveliness of his example, as well as his mental treasure of
human and divine knowledge, secured him the most candid attention, and
gave an interesting and edifying charm to his discourses. While he
pointed to heaven, he also himself led the way.

His profession of religion, extended as it was, to nearly half a
century, was remarkable for its uniform consistency and unfailing
constancy. As the disciple of Jesus, he was spiritual, humble, and
zealous. In his official capacity in the church, he was watchful,
diligent, and active; condescending, affectionate, and kind to the
poorest of the flock; loving to all his brethren, and much beloved by
them. In all the relations of life he sustained, whether as a husband,
parent, friend, or neighbour, the excellencies of his religion were
developed with more than common lustre; and secured to him a
well-deserved reputation, a most profound respect. That he had his
imperfections we readily admit; and if, as astronomers inform us, there
are dark spots even on the sun in the heavens, no wonder that feeble
creatures, dwelling in dust, should present some shades of infirmity.
But yet as the sun of nature, in spite of his spots, pours a constant
flood of refulgent light upon surrounding worlds, so our esteemed
friend, notwithstanding some manifest imperfections, presented to all
who encircled him the light of an eminent example of religion, in the
unyielding integrity of its principles, and in all the amiable
loveliness of its practice. Through the grace of God which was bestowed
upon him, his path was truly as the shining light, which shineth more
and more to the perfect day.

Here, however, he had no continuing city, and at length the time of his
departure hence drew near. A paralytic stroke, in 1824, had admonished
him of his approaching change. Though from that seizure he was soon, in
part, mercifully recovered, and was still in a good degree active and
useful; yet his mental powers then received a shock, in consequence of
which they gradually became still more and more impaired; so that for
the three or four last years of his life, his intellect resembled a
magnificent structure, fallen and in ruins. As long, however, as any
capability remained, he continued to attend the house of God with the
liveliest interest; and for a long time was conveyed to it, when much
enfeebled, in a Bath chair. He had the happiness of seeing the last of
his children received into the church, on profession of repentance
towards God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. The last time he ever
attended on the public means of grace, was with much difficulty, in
October, 1833, when his youngest son was baptized; and it was to him a
most sacred season of unspeakable delight and joy. From this time he
continued in a very feeble state, both of mind and body, though without
much suffering; till Monday, 28th July last, when he was assailed with
the illness, that quickly manifested itself to be the harbinger of
death. The conflict, however, was short, for on the following Sabbath
evening, Aug. 3rd, 1834, he was released, and his emancipated spirit
took its soaring flight to his long desired and eternal rest. "Precious
in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints." His remains were
interred on the following Thursday, by the Rev. John Campbell, pastor of
the church in Lion Street, who delivered an interesting, appropriate,
and solemn address on the occasion. On the following Lord's-day, Aug.
10th, Mr. Williams of Ryeford preached his funeral discourse, from
Isaiah lvii. 1, 2.

May all who read this memoir be followers of our deceased brother, as
he was of Christ!

                                                              W. W. R.


                          THE CHRISTIAN ARMOUR.

                               THE GIRDLE.

                _To the Editor of the Baptist Magazine._

=Amongst= other predictions of the Messiah's character and fitness for
the offices which he had undertaken, we read, Isa. xi. 5, that
"righteousness should be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the
girdle of his reins:" and the apostle reminds us that, if we would
profit by the example of the Captain of our salvation, and the armour
which he hath provided for us, we must have our loins girt about with
truth. The girdle was used chiefly to strengthen the loins, but was also
of great service in uniting the different parts of the armour compactly
together. If a body be loaded with armour hanging loosely, many wounds
may be inflicted, unless they are fastened together by the belt or
girdle: so the Christian's graces may prove insufficient to preserve or
fortify him, unless compacted by the girdle of sincerity.

As the apostle had directed the posture in which the Christian should
maintain the fight, so he exhorts them to gird the loins, as the seat
of bodily strength, which we are to understand spiritually, as "the
loins of the mind," (1 Peter i. 13,) to be girt about with truth.

=Truth= may be considered as opposed to error, or to insincerity; and as
characterizing man's creed, or his conduct. There is truth in doctrine,
and truth in duty; truth in principle, and truth in practice; and the
_Christian soldier_ is supposed to possess all these. We regard it here
as synonymous with sincerity, and corresponding with the exhortation
of Joshua to the chosen tribes: "Serve the Lord in _sincerity_ and
_truth_;" and of the apostle to the Corinthians: "Keep the feast with
the unleavened bread of _sincerity_ and _truth_." In like manner we
are to enter on the conflict with our spiritual adversaries with the
utmost integrity, otherwise the greatest advantages will prove utterly
unavailable. Christian sincerity is too generally considered as nothing
more than _good intention_, which may exist with great error in
doctrine, and evil in practice; and has been found in the superstitious
bigot, and the blood thirsty persecutor.

But the sincerity required in a good soldier of Jesus Christ, implies
an _honest endeavour to understand the will of God; a prompt obedience
to the word of command; and an entire devotion to the cause of truth
and righteousness_.

Sincerity may consist with very defective views of divine truth; but it
will not consist with allowed deviations from truth or duty. The wisdom
that is from above is "without partiality and without hypocrisy." It is
allowed, that Paul, before his conversion, "_verily thought_ that he
_ought_ to do many things against the name of Jesus;" but it does not
appear that he took pains to examine the claims of Christianity as he
might have done; and, but for the abounding mercy of God through Christ,
his ignorance and unbelief would have formed no cloak for his sin. It
could not be for want of opportunity that he did not attend the ministry
of Christ himself. Why did he not first search the Scriptures as the
Bereans did, to see whether things were as the apostles affirmed them to
be? Nathanael of Galilee was the subject of a popular prejudice when he
said, with an air of indifference and distrust, "Can any good thing come
out of Nazareth?" Yet he went to examine for himself; and when he saw,
he believed with the heart, and confessed with the mouth, and obtained
that honourable testimony that he was "an Israelite indeed, in whom
there was no guile."

Nor is it less essential to sincerity that the soldier yield a prompt
obedience to the word of command. No intelligence, nor skill in armour,
will make up for the want of integrity manifested by the disobedient.
Who does not see the insincerity of those Jews who, it is said, believed
in Christ, but were afraid to confess Him? Or of that amiable youth who
turned back from following Him, rather than part with his possessions?
Or of him who would follow Christ, but must wait for the death of his
father? Or those to whom He said, with a degree of severity not usual
with the Saviour, "Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things that
I say?" but added, "Then are ye my disciples indeed, when ye do
whatsoever I command you."

The sincerity of Paul, when converted, was evident to all, and remains
as a model for every honest-hearted inquirer. Observe, how inquisitive!
"Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" What resolution to obey!
"Immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood." And what
perseverance! "What mean ye, to weep and break my heart? I am ready, not
only to be bound, but to die at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord
Jesus." This decision of character cleared his course, and brought other
disciples to a better mind; for it is added, "When he would not be
persuaded, they ceased, saying, The will of the Lord be done!"

In the same interesting character we have exemplified that entire
devotion of heart and life which demonstrated the sincerity of his
profession, the purity of his motives, and the strength of his
attachment to the Author and Finisher of his faith.

On no occasion did he discover the feebleness usually attendant upon a
divided heart, or the selfish pride which, under the garb of zeal for
God, so often seeks its own glory:--not like Jehu, who, it is admitted,
exterminated the family of Ahab at the command of God, yet was actuated
by a spirit of vain-glory; and as what he did was not to please God,
so the ambitious cruelty from which he acted was avenged on his
posterity:--not as the Jews, who, in keeping religious fasts and feasts,
did it to themselves and not to God. The apostles could say, "Whether
we live, we live to the Lord; and whether we die, we die to the Lord."
So that the one universal rule of action which gave simplicity to
their aim and unity to their efforts, was, "Whether we eat, or drink,
or whatever we do, we should do all to the glory of God."

From the important nature of this branch of armour, we may infer its
extensive usefulness.

To compact together the various graces of the Spirit; and to strengthen
the soul under great and long-continued conflicts. Thus the Lord
strengthened David, and prepared him for conflict, Ps. xviii. 39: "Thou
hast girded me with strength to the battle." Alluding to this, he
expected preservation in the evil day, Ps. xxv. 21: "Let integrity and
uprightness preserve me." In prophesying of the Messiah, he employs a
similar expression, Ps. cxiii. 1: "The Lord is clothed with strength,
wherewith He hath girded himself."

The worth of this may be learned by the want of it. How many "faint in
the day of adversity," showing that "their strength is small!" For want
of this, Peter and Luke were carried away with dissimulation; and were
recovered by means of a painful exposure, and public rebuke.

Through insincerity the children of Judah carrying bows turned back in
the day of battle; and Demas forsook the apostles, and returned to the
bosom of the world. Unhappy man! For a time he appeared to give up earth
for the hope of heaven, then turned from the holy commandment for the
sake of the world; and, for aught that appears, was finally cast away!

Contrast with these, others, fighting under the same banners, and who
contended against similar foes, but were by nature equally insufficient
of themselves; yet these were sincere, girded with truth. Behold Daniel
and his three noble associates, who would neither relinquish, nor defer,
nor even conceal their religion, but presented a firm crest to the
insulting foe; and, having faith unfeigned, love without dissimulation,
and a spirit without guile, no poisoned arrows could pierce them, no
furious threatenings could divert them; and when they had passed through
the furnace, "their clothes did not so much as smell of the fire." In
like manner the apostles could say in the midst of much tribulation,
"Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and _godly sincerity_, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the
grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world." Let every
Christian soldier have "_his loins girt about with truth_," and "_the
feeble shall be as David, and David as an angel of God!_"

                                                       _Clapham._  J. E.


                       THE LATE CHRISTOPHER SMART.

                _To the Editor of the Baptist Magazine._

=A writer= in the April Number of your Miscellany, influenced by the
genius displayed in the verses of Mr. Smart therein quoted, requested to
learn more of the history of the poet. If the following particulars are
considered worthy of insertion, I will also offer for your future pages
the biography of another literary character. The present narrative of
the incidents in the life of Mr. Christopher Smart presents a great mind
under the influence of a common but dangerous evil, and displays
powerful arguments to call off the Christian from that pernicious habit
which brought ruin on him. This will be seen in the sequel.

=Christopher Smart= was born at Shipbourne, in Kent, April 11, 1722. His
father was possessed of almost L300 a year, from an estate in that
neighbourhood. His mother was a Miss Gilpin, of the family of the
celebrated reformer, Bernard Gilpin, by the father's side. His
grandfather had been a prebendary of Durham, in the reign of Charles I.,
and was accounted by the puritan party as the proto-martyr in their
cause, having been degraded and deprived of all his ecclesiastical
preferments, fined L500, and imprisoned eleven years. When restored to
liberty by the parliament, he appeared as a witness against Archbishop
Laud: the libel for which he suffered was written in Latin verse, and
was published in 1643.

The family estate at Shipbourne was, at the death of his father, sold at
a considerable loss to pay his debts, and the widow and family were thus
left destitute. His father was a man of liberal education, and probably
communicated to his son a taste for literature; and to the same source
may possibly be ascribed that train of pious reflections which appeared
so conspicuous in many of his poetical pieces.

Smart was born earlier than the usual period of gestation, which might
occasion a tenderness of constitution. His taste for poetry is said to
have appeared when he was only four years old, in an extempore effusion
which has not been preserved, but which is said to have indicated a
relish for verse, and an ear for numbers. He was educated at Maidstone
until he was eleven years old, at which time his father died, and his
mother was induced to send him to Durham, where he might enjoy the
advantages of a good school, change of air, and, what in his
circumstances became desirable, the notice and protection of his
father's relations.

Young Smart was cordially received at Raby Castle by Lord Barnard, and
also obtained the friendship of the Hon. Mrs. Hope, and the more
substantial patronage of the Duchess of Cleveland, who allowed him L40 a
year until her death in 1742. It was probably owing to the liberality of
Lord Barnard that, after he had acquired very considerable reputation at
Durham School, he was sent to Cambridge in his seventeenth year, and
admitted at Pembroke Hall October 30, 1739.

At college he was much more distinguished for his poetical effort and
classical taste, than for an ambition to excel in the usual routine of
academical studies, and soon became a favourite with such of his
contemporaries as were gay and licentious. His imprudence involved him
in difficulties; and his difficulties, not being quickly removed,
induced an habitual neglect of pecuniary matters, which adhered to him
throughout life. His pursuit of convivial enjoyments, and frequent
excess, formed the chief blot in his character.

In 1743 he was admitted to the degree of Bachelor of Arts: and July 3,
1745, was elected a fellow of Pembroke Hall. In 1747 he took the degree
of Master of Arts, and became a candidate for the Seatonian prize,
which was actually adjudged to him for five years, four of them in
succession.[A] It is probable that he might have succeeded in the year
that he failed, but his thoughts had been diverted from close attention
by an important change in his situation.

[Footnote A: The subjects of these poems were: "The Eternity--the
Immensity--the Omniscience--the Power--and the Goodness of the Supreme
Being." They were severally published from the year 1750 to 1756.]

In 1753 he quitted college, on his marriage with Miss Ann Maria Carnan,
the daughter, by a former husband, of Mary, wife of Mr. John Newbery,
the bookseller, of St. Paul's Church-yard.

Smart's pleasing manners, and generally inoffensive conduct, procured
him the friendship of Dr. Johnson, Garrick, Dr. James, Dr. Burney, and
other literary men of eminence. The friendship of these scholars, and of
Lord Delaval, to whom Smart had been private tutor, were of great use to
him when in distress. Dr. Johnson manifested much sympathy for poor
Smart, and in a time of need promptly lent him his aid. The notices of
this feeling in Boswell's Life of Johnson are very interesting; but with
all literary men our poet was not in harmony, for so much rancour was
manifested between Smart and Sir John Hill, that the former began a work
entitled _Hilliad_, and the latter was equally pugnacious in a
periodical, entitled _Smartiad_. Smart was injured by this war of
obloquy with one, whom to conquer was to exceed in the worst part of his
character. Hill was a compiler of books and a hackneyed practitioner in
the arts of that profession. He was beneath the notice of Smart. "The
Hilliad," which is perhaps one of the most bitter satires ever
published, would afford a very unfavourable opinion of our author's
character, had it not been an attack on a man who had rendered himself
ridiculous and contemptible by practising with unblushing effrontery
every species of literary and medical quackery.

In 1754 was published his "Hymn to the Supreme Being," written on his
recovery from a dangerous fit of illness _brought on by intemperance_.
This illness continued through 1755, and part of 1756. Who can think of
the benumbing and debasing effect of spirits, and not shudder at the
apathy with which the practice is viewed? He could write a Hymn of
Gratitude to the Supreme Being, and yet not discover the cause of his
illness, and depart from the practice. The constitution of Mr. Smart
required the utmost care. His mind was easily excited. His disposition
was naturally amiable and placid, but the use of spirits created so much
mental irritability upon an imagination uncommonly fervid, that his
powers gave way, and produced strange alienation of mind; and ignorant
that the use of spirits thus withered and morbidly inflamed his powers,
he sought assistance from the destroying enemy, and at last his
paroxysms became so violent and continued, as to render confinement
necessary. In this melancholy state, his family (for he had now two
children) must have been much embarrassed in their circumstances, but
for the kind friendship and assistance of Mr. Newbery. Many others were
forward to assist; and particularly Dr. Samuel Johnson.

Your readers, Mr. Editor, after perusing this sketch of Mr. Smart's
history, will doubtless be gratified by the account which Mr. Boswell
narrates of a conversation with Dr. Johnson on the case of Smart. The
Doctor observes:

    "Madness frequently discovers itself merely by unnecessary deviation
    from the usual modes of the world. My poor friend Smart showed the
    disturbance of his mind by falling upon his knees, and saying his
    prayers, in the street, or in any other unusual place. Now although,
    rationally speaking, it is greater madness not to pray at all, than
    to pray as Smart did, I am afraid there are so many who do not pray,
    that their understanding is not called in question. Concerning this
    unfortunate poet, Christopher Smart, who was confined in a madhouse,
    he had, at another time, the following conversation with Dr. Burney:
    Burney--'How does poor Smart do, Sir? is he likely to recover?'
    Johnson--'It seems as if his mind had ceased to struggle with the
    disease; for he grows fat upon it.' Burney--'Perhaps, Sir, that may
    be from want of exercise?' Johnson--'No, Sir; he has partly as much
    exercise as he used to have; for he digs in the garden. Indeed,
    before his confinement, he used for exercise to walk to the
    alehouse; but he was carried back again. I did not think he ought to
    be shut up. His infirmities were not noxious to society. He insisted
    on people praying with him; and I'd as lief pray with Kit Smart as
    any one else.'"--_Boswell's Life of Johnson_, Page 349, vol. i.,
    Edit. 1822, 8vo.

After his recovery, which was, as it appears by his conduct, not quite
complete, he joined with Rolt, to write for a Magazine published by
Gardner,[A] which continued only two years. The contract was for
ninety-nine years, and Smart and Rolt were to have a third of the
profits. Dr. Johnson, with a friendly feeling, wrote some articles.

    [Footnote A: Mr. Henry Gardner, whom the writer of this note knew
    well, lived at the corner of Melford Lane, in the Strand. He was a
    shrewd man, and probably made the contract for ninety-nine years to
    bind the services of two irregular men.]

Smart's madness, according to Dr. Johnson's account, discovered itself
chiefly in unnecessary deviations from the usual modes of the world, in
things that are not improper in themselves. He would fall upon his knees
and say his prayers in the street, or in any unusual place, and insisted
on people praying with him. These were regarded as the vagaries of an
eccentric man, and not hallucinations of the mind arising from the
effects of stimulating drinks; but some were wiser, and placed him in
confinement, "to give his constitution a chance of recovering from the
effects of intemperance." When his mind appeared to be in some measure
restored, he took a pleasant lodging near St. James's Park, and
conducted his affairs for some time with prudence. He was maintained
partly by his literary occupations, and partly by the generosity of his
friends, receiving, among other benefactions, L50 a year from the
treasury, but by whose interest this favour was obtained is not known.

In 1757 he published "A Prose Translation of the Works of Horace." From
this performance he could derive but little fame. He thought that such
a translation could be useful to those who are desirous of acquiring or
recovering a competent knowledge of the Latin tongue. The good or the
evil of literal translations is yet a problem, and each side of the
question has its advocates. Though our poet was engaged on the one
hand in translating the Odes of Horace into prose, on the other he
successfully translated Pope's Ode to St. Cecilia into Latin verse, and
thereby obtained the notice of Mr. Pope, with whom a correspondence
ensued, of which Mr. Smart was not a little vain.

In what manner he lived for some time after this, we are not told; but
Garrick, finding him in pecuniary distress, gave him the profits of a
benefit at his theatre.

In 1763, he published "A Song to David," in which there are some
passages greatly to be admired, and which, Mr. Editor, as a man of
taste, you have introduced to your readers; but there are some to be
found of even more majestic animation; and it will surprise the reader
when he is told that this piece was composed by him during his
confinement; when he was debarred the use of pen, ink, and paper, and
was obliged to indent his lines, with the end of a key, upon the
wainscot. In the same year he published "Poems," and at the conclusion
betrays that irritability and self-conceit which are frequently observed
to precede, and generally to accompany, derangement of mind.

In all these poems his imagination, although occasionally fine, went
often into wild excesses, and evinced that his mind had never recovered
its _sober_ tone. In his intervals of health and regularity, he still
continued to write. His "Translation of the Psalms of David" afford a
melancholy proof of want of judgment and decay of powers. We find him at
length an inmate of the King's Bench prison. Here he died after a short
illness, occasioned by a disorder in his liver, May 18th, 1770, leaving
two daughters, who, with his widow, were long settled at Reading, and by
their prudent management of the bookselling trade, transferred to them
by Mr. John Newbery, were enabled to maintain a very respectable rank in
life.

Of his personal character, the following particulars yet remain to be
added from the memoirs: "His piety was exemplary and fervent; it may not
be uninteresting to the reader to be told, that Mr. Smart, in composing
the religious poems, was frequently so impressed with the sentiment of
devotion, as to write particular passages on his knees. He was friendly,
affectionate, and liberal to excess; so as often to give that to others
of which he was in the utmost want himself."

In his religious poems on the Supreme Deity, written for the Seatonian
prize, the fault was perhaps in the expectation that such subjects can
be treated with advantage. In the preface to Pope's Ode to St. Cecilia,
he allows that, "the choosing too high subjects has been the ruin of
many a tolerable genius;" and Dr. Johnson, with majestic energy,
remarks, that "whatever is great, desirable, or tremendous, is comprised
in the name of the Supreme Being. Omnipotence cannot be exalted;
infinity cannot be amplified; perfection cannot be improved."

                                                               =Leumas.=


              A CANDID APPEAL TO CONGREGATIONAL CHRISTIANS.

                _To the Editor of the Baptist Magazine._

=Of= all the divisions existing among the real servants of Christ, there
is none, I think, so remarkable, nor more injurious, than the separation
of congregationalists into the two parties of Paedobaptists and
Antipaedobaptists. Perfectly agreed as they are respecting the character
of the New Testament church, and occupying exactly the same position
with regard to the ecclesiastical establishments of this country, it
appears truly surprising that they should yet entirely disagree as to
the qualifications entitling an individual to the sacred initiatory
ordinance of the Christian dispensation; and that, after the lapse of
centuries, during which the finest talents on each side have been
employed in the discussion of the subject, that they should yet remain
as decidedly opposed upon it as at the first. Perhaps both parties are
equally culpable with regard to the spirit in which their respective
positions may have been maintained; but it is evident that only one of
them can be wrong with regard to the letter. Christians of all parties
are now entertaining the hope, that the day is drawing nigh when the
spiritual vision of the members of Christ shall be so improved as to
enable them to avail themselves of the full light of the gospel to
subdue their respective prejudices and antipathies; and when the love of
Christ shall be so shed abroad in all hearts, as to lead them into that
blessed state of union, into which it is predicted the church is to be
brought. And here I beg to ask, considering how simple is the nature of
the question which divides the congregationalists into two parties, if
this blessed movement ought not to begin with them? And what an honour
it would be, to be the first in this glorious movement! And surely it
may well animate us earnestly to desire this goodly precedence, when we
consider how powerfully and influentially the example would act on all
other Christian parties, so as probably to lead all rapidly forward to
the happy, long-desired consummation. In the meantime we may well bear
with the errors of other parties, considering how many causes concur to
keep them under the dominion of their prejudices, and that all of them
are heightened by the spectacle of our own unnatural division, while we
are calling upon them to submit themselves to the laws of the New
Testament. O that all controversial argumentation might for the future
be conducted only in the spirit of love! that all might be prepared to
lay aside censoriousness, and all appearances of contempt, to avoid all
unseemly confidence, and sedulously to watch against a spirit of self
exaltation, desiring that the Lord alone may be exalted in the display
and in the triumph of his truth! When the Spirit of the Lord shall be so
poured upon his church, that the truth shall be sought in this way,
errors will soon be detected, and the blessed union of saints be quickly
accomplished. The church is not without the means. The cause of our
differences is not the want of sufficient spiritual light.

I have remarked above, that _one_ of the parties only on the subject of
infant baptism can be wrong with regard to the letter; and here it is
with real grief that I must appear in the character of a partisan; but I
humbly submit to the candid consideration of my Paedobaptist brethren
whether what follows be not a fair representation of the principal
grounds on which the advocates of the practice of baptizing infants
found their arguments in support of the practice: _The covenant of
grace, as it was revealed to Abraham, discovers it to be the will of
God, that the infants of believers in Christ should be dedicated to God
by baptism. That the practice was sanctioned by the apostles, and
designed to be a blessing to children, and serviceable to the cause of
the gospel._

The following queries are, with great Christian respect and affection,
offered for the consideration of the Paedobaptist servants of Christ.

1. Does it not appear to be a fundamental principle in the New
Testament, and designed to have been constantly kept in view, that the
churches of Christ should, as far as human judgment and Christian
charity would allow, be exclusively voluntary associations of persons
brought to desire the salvation of Christ, and to be numbered as his
servants?

2. Is there any part of the New Testament which will justify a church in
recognizing any persons as the children of the promise, unless they
appear to be partakers of the faith of Abraham? On the contrary, does it
not plainly appear that the New Testament children of the father of the
faithful should receive baptism as Abraham received circumcision, a seal
of the grace which they had being yet unbaptized?

3. Were not circumcisions under the Abrahamic covenant more extensive
and indiscriminate than the circumcisions under the Mosaic economy, and
therefore more unlike New Testament baptisms than the latter? Wherefore,
then, is the former covenant represented as affording the archetype of
Christian baptism?

4. Under the Old Testament covenant the descendants of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob were by natural birth--whether partakers of spiritual faith or
not--equal members of the commonwealth of Israel. But is not the New
Testament covenant, in this respect, essentially different, the
principles of the gospel not recognizing unions of the holy and the
unholy, and the New Testament containing no provisions for the
government of such communities?

5. Is not the New Testament covenant peculiarly distinguished from the
Jewish, whether considered as Abrahamic or Mosaic (was the latter any
thing more than a development of the former?) by its _unveiled_
spirituality, and by its respect for individual moral character?

6. Does the New Testament, in any part, appear to recognize the people
of Christ in a corporate capacity, except as they appear to be united by
the spiritual principles of the gospel?

7. Is not the remarkable fact, that Paedobaptism obliges its advocates to
retire back to the book of Genesis in search of a covenant to justify
them in their use of the _New Testament_ ordinance of baptism, of itself
nearly sufficient to evince that their practice is inconsistent with
_the covenant of grace, as it is revealed in the gospel?_ and does it
not become a certainty, when it appears that circumcision under _the
Abrahamic covenant_ was, in some important respects, an institution of a
perfectly contrary character to the ordinance of baptism; the former
exhibiting a _compulsory_ character, which rendered it imperative upon
Abraham to circumcise Ishmael, and to _enforce_ it upon his whole
household, whether bond or free; and to enjoin it for all their
posterity, under the awful threatening of utter exclusion from the
covenant and family of God? Is there not here _a most striking contrast_
with the inspired records of the institution and administration of the
ordinance of baptism?

8. If the views of the apostles on this subject had been coincident
with those of Antipaedobaptist divines, could they have refrained from
declaring them, when the conduct of the teachers of circumcision was
such as to create continual occasions which called for a plain statement
of the gospel doctrine of baptism? Did not the state into which the
infant church at Antioch had been brought by these teachers particularly
require that such statements should be made? Would not a declaration on
the part of the apostles, in their assembly at Jerusalem, of the
doctrine of Paedobaptism, have tended at once to terminate the
controversy? Is it imaginable that they should have refrained, on this
occasion, from informing the Gentile converts that, by the substitution
of baptism for circumcision, they and their children were exempted for
ever from the claims of the circumcisers?

9. What law of the gospel is broken by those parents who, without
baptism, prayerfully devote their children to Christ?

10. Are the children of Antipaedobaptists, if brought up in the nurture
and admonition of the Lord, less likely to become living members of
Christ than the children of Paedobaptists; and is there any spiritual
benefit conferred on these by the rite, of which those to whom it is not
administered are deprived?

11. Whenever a pious Jew might have been asked the question, What
benefits are secured to the children and nation of Israel by the rite of
circumcision? he could at once, by a reference to the appointment, and
to the promises and threatenings connected with it, have given a clear
and satisfactory answer to the question; but when a similar question is
proposed to Paedobaptists respecting their practice, are they able to
give to it a like satisfactory answer? Is there any agreement on the
subject? Is not every thing here vague, mystical, and incongruous? And
wherefore is this? Is it not simply because that, unlike the Jew, they
canot refer to "the law and to the testimony?"

12. Is not the distinction existing in Paedobaptist churches, between
persons who are entitled to one only of the sacraments of the gospel,
and those who are entitled to both; between unconsciously initiated
members, and professed voluntary members, entirely without countenance
from the New Testament?

13. Was not baptism in the apostles' days a special means of grace in
the church; and was it not always designed to be so? But if it is not a
means of grace to infants, does not the baptizing them plainly tend to
nullify a gospel ordinance, depriving both them and the church of its
benefits?

14. Has not the practice of infant baptism, in all ages of the church,
been a pernicious source of delusion? And is there any way of avoiding
its injurious influence on the world, and regaining the benefit of the
ordinance to the church, but by following up the principles of the New
Testament, and abandoning the practice of infant baptism?

Let these inquiries be seriously, impartially, and prayerfully
considered, by all who are concerned for the purity and efficiency of
the church, the unity of its members, and the glory of its Author.

                                                      =Antipaedobaptist.=


                         ON A MISSIONARY SPIRIT.

                _To the Editor of the Baptist Magazine._

No period of the rolling year, perhaps, is received with more cordial
feelings of joy than the one on which we have now entered. To the
admirer of the works of nature--its smiling face--its verdant
mantle--the exchange of the chilly blast of winter for etherial mildness
and softer gales, cannot but afford pleasure and delight; for "lo,
winter is past; the rain is over and gone; and the time of the singing
of birds is come."

To those that love to contemplate God, not only in the works of nature,
but also in those of grace, the approach of this month cannot but be
hailed with feelings of joy, on account of those delightful
opportunities which are then afforded of hearing our missionary
brethren, who have come from the east and the west to rehearse all that
the Lord has done for them, and how he has opened the door of faith unto
the Gentiles (heathen).

It is, however, to be feared that, with many, the pleasure that is felt
in attending these public meetings arises from the mere excitement of
passion, not based upon or guided by any fixed principle; and therefore,
like the morning cloud and early dew, soon passes away. If it be asked,
What is the true spirit which every Christian should possess in
reference to the publication of the truth? it may be replied, _A
missionary spirit_; which includes,

1. _A spirit of importunate prayer._ What single employment is there in
which we may be engaged, or what enterprise can we undertake, that does
not depend upon our Maker for success? The merchant may freight his bark
for a distant shore; but for its safe arrival into port, he must look to
Him who holds the waters in the hollow of his hand, and whom the winds
and sea obey. The husbandman may prepare the soil, and implant the seed
but from God alone can he expect the gentle showers of rain, and the
congenial sunshine. And if the blessing of God is absolutely necessary
for the success of undertakings relating to temporal affairs, how much
more so in things that are spiritual! Here, especially, Paul may plant,
and Apollos water; but it is God alone that can give the increase. And
in what way are we to seek it but by prayer? It is prayer that will open
the windows of heaven, and cause the Almighty to pour us out a blessing,
so that there shall not be room to receive it. It will come down like
rain on the new-mown grass--as showers that water the earth.

In all the dwellings of Jacob may prayer be heard ascending to the Most
High, for blessings to attend our meetings!

2. _A spirit of thanksgiving._ It is the distinguishing feature in a
worldly man's disposition or character, that, however he may be inclined
to pray for worldly prosperity, he is always backward in acknowledging
the blessing bestowed; yea, the more God lavishes his favours upon him,
the less does he recognize the hand of the Giver. Let us act as becometh
Christians. Let our hearts overflow with gratitude for mercies received.
Let past mercies excite us to gratitude, and encourage us in our future
labours.

3. _A spirit of rejoicing._ Let not the interesting intelligence that
may be afforded be read with cold indifference. What is the Christian's
joy and crown of rejoicing? Is it not the salvation of the soul through
his instrumentality? If there is joy in heaven over one sinner that
repenteth, shall it not produce joy in our bosoms when we hear, not of
one, but of many being brought to the knowledge of the truth?

4. _A spirit of active benevolence._ Here is the test of our love to
Jesus. What is more diffusive or expanding, or constraining in its
nature, than the principle of love? It has for the object of its aim the
glory of God, and seeks in every way to promote it. The desire of such a
soul is, that Christ may be magnified in his body, whether it be by life
or by death.

May a _missionary spirit_ be the one which animates every reader!

                                                                   X. Y.


                           UNION IS STRENGTH.

                _To the Editor of the Baptist Magazine._

=I have= seen a circular respecting the "Baptist Union." It is a very
common remark, that "the Independents and the Wesleyan Methodists are
more united than the Baptists." How is this, or why should it be? They
are probably more numerous, and this may be owing to unity. Let us look
at the counties of Surrey and Sussex. Is there any Baptist interest
between Clapham and Horsham? At the latter place there are some general
Baptists. Again: are there any Baptists between Croydon and East
Grinstead? At Brighton there are some; but take the road from Brighton
to Portsmouth, and where will you find any? Not at Worthing, nor
Arundel, nor Chichester, nor Emsworth, nor Havant. How is this? Either
the funds of the Baptist Home Mission are deficient; or there is a want
of exertion. Again: from Wandsworth to Guildford, Godalming, and onward
to Portsmouth, are there any Baptists? If there are, it is unknown to
me. Again; if you could describe a circle of twenty miles circumference,
making Findon, near Worthing, the centre of the circle, where will you
find any Baptists, if you except Brighton and Horsham?

Some twenty years since there were a few general Baptists at Chichester;
but they have long been extinct. Now, Sir, if there really was that
union of heart, of mental energy, of exertion, and of purse, _which
there ought to be_, I might have been spared putting the questions which
I have just asked.

Again: at Leeds there is a population of nearly 130,000, and, properly
speaking, but _one_ Baptist interest. There is ample room there for
several; there is no lack of Independents and Methodists at Leeds. I
fear, Sir, that this is only a very small sample of what might be given.
I do not think that we so much lack preachers, _as funds to support
them_.

At some places, probably, the preachers might teach a school: although
that is not the best way a preacher might be employed; yet, in an
emergency, it might be adopted. The subject, however, _deserves_ serious
consideration. We want "a long pull, a strong pull, and a pull
altogether;" and then something might be done. Again: is there that
union, and cordiality, and brotherly kindness, and Christian affection,
and personal intercourse, between the rich and the poor amongst us,
which our Master has enjoined and _commanded_? I trow not. Until _this_
is effected, how can we expect prosperity and increase? Do we not also
want more prayer--secret prayer for each other; social prayer; and, when
we pray, that we may love each other, ought we not _to do it_, "not in
word and in tongue, but in deed and in truth?"

                                          =A Baptist of the Old School.=


                                 POETRY.

                             A BROKEN HEART.

    What makes me court seclusion's shade,
    And shun this vain world's gay parade,
    Whose pleasures blossom but to fade?
                            A broken heart.

    What makes me heave the deep-drawn sigh,
    And raise to heaven my weeping eye,
    And inly groan--I scarce know why?
                            A broken heart.

    What makes me bend before God's throne,
    There all my guilt and misery own,
    And seek my help from Christ alone?
                            A broken heart.

    What makes the word of life so sweet,
    That I could sit at Jesu's feet,
    And never quit that dear retreat?
                            A broken heart.

    What makes the cross such charms to wear,
    That while I gaze and linger there,
    No room is left for dark despair?
                            A broken heart.

    What is it mellows all my joy,
    Weans me from every earthly toy,
    And leads to bliss without alloy?
                            A broken heart.

    What spreads new rapture through the skies?
    'Tis when a soul for mercy cries,
    And angels see with wondering eyes
                            A broken heart.

    What though the wounds of sin are sore,
    Jesus, my Lord, has balm in store;
    I'll use it, till I feel no more
                            A broken heart.


                          COMMUNION OF SAINTS.

    I love to hear the rising songs
      That celebrate the Saviour's name
    Attuned by kindred hearts and tongues,
      Who think, and feel, and speak the same.

    No voice of discord there is heard;
      No thoughts unholy or unkind;
    No jarring, unharmonious word,
      To mar the melody of mind.

    No more the party-wall of pride,
      Erected by one common foe,
    The hearts of brethren shall divide,
      While passing through the vale below.

    No more, secluded and unknown,
      In isolated paths they tread;
    Nor speed their devious way alone,
      Till numbered with the silent dead.

    One faith is beaming in their eye;
      One hope within their bosom glows;
    While hastening to the realms on high,
      The blissful region of repose.

    One is the heaven-born joy they feel;
      The holy peace and calm delight
    That each enraptured spirit seal,
      When Calvary opens on their sight.

    One Lord redeemed them with his blood,
      And rose triumphant from the tomb,
    To lead them to one Father--God,
      Whose smiles their darkest hours illume.

    One Spirit breathes in every soul
      With life, and power, and love divine;
    Diffusing radiance through the whole,
      Till bright in holiness they shine.

    And in one home they all will meet,
      Their dangers and their sorrows o'er;
    And one delightful theme repeat,--
      United there to part no more.

                                                                  =Eta.=


                                REVIEWS.

    _Memoir of the Life and Writings of the Rev. Joseph Ivimey, late
    Pastor of the Church in Eagle Street, London, and twenty years
    gratuitous Secretary to the Baptist Irish Society._ By =George
    Pritchard=.--Wightman.

If there be a name which more than any other merits honourable mention
in this periodical, it is unquestionably that of =Joseph Ivimey=. He was
one of its earliest correspondents, contributed largely, in various
ways, to bring it up from Tiverton to London, and wrote frequently in
all its departments. He was ever ready to cheer its friends, and to
fight with its enemies; for the interest of our ministers' widows lay
very near his heart, and in all his multifarious engagements in relation
to this object, he was evidently stimulated by Christian compassion.

The name of Mr. I. will be identified with all the great institutions
connected with the denomination to which he thought it an honour to
belong; and, more especially, in the list of Ireland's benefactors he is
certainly destined to hold a very distinguished place. Our departed
brother knew that words are cheaper than stones in the street; but it
will be remembered that on one occasion, particularly, he devoted much
time, and labour, and property, and influence, by which he encouraged
the committee to send over ship-loads of necessary food to keep the poor
Irish alive from famine.

Mr. I. was born at Ringwood, in Hampshire, May 22nd, 1773. It appears,
from the interesting narrative before us, that he lived in ignorance and
unbelief till he was 18 years old. Mr. Thomas Williams,[A] in the
presence of his two maternal aunts, said to him one day, "Young man, do
you know any thing of these things?" With an honest promptitude, by
which his whole life was characterized, he unhesitatingly replied, "I
know nothing at all about them." But the arrow had gone deep into his
heart; and nothing but the balm of Gilead could save him. Subsequently
he derived much benefit from Elisha Cole's popular book on Divine
Sovereignty, and from a sermon delivered by Dr. Steadman. He was
baptized at Wimborne, September 16th, 1790, by the late Rev. John
Saffery. In the following year he removed to Lymington, and derived much
instruction from the Rev. James Barnett, who still survives, and is in
communion with the church at Eagle Street.

    [Footnote A: Afterwards an Independent Minister, at Bradford.]

He came first to London in April, 1793, and communed with the church in
Keppel Street, then under the pastoral care of the Rev. J. Martin.
Occasionally, also, he heard Mr. Swain at his Lord's-day evening
lecture, in Devonshire Square.

    "In taking the coach by which he was to depart, he silently said, 'I
    will never see this London again.' But the words of the prophet are
    greatly to be preferred: 'O Lord, I know that the way of man is not
    in himself; it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps.'" p.
    34.

In 1794, he removed to Portsea, and was married July 7th, 1795. By this
marriage he had two sons, and four daughters: one son and one daughter
survive to lament the loss of their father. Early in 1803, when nearly
thirty years of age, he was encouraged to preach by the church at
Portsea, to which he and his wife were united, under the care of Joseph
Horsey and Daniel Miall, who were co-pastors. Relinquishing secular
business, in September, 1803, he removed, with his wife and two
children, to Wallingford, and became assistant to Mr. Lovegrove. Having
occupied the station at Wallingford nearly twelve months, he was invited
to Eagle Street, in consequence of the resignation of the late Rev.
William Smith. In July, 1804, he removed to that same London of which,
at an early period, he had thought so lightly; and there the remaining
half of his life was happily, honourably, and usefully spent. He died
February 8th, 1834. But why should we further pursue the narrative? From
the date of his settlement in London, he was "an epistle of Christ,
known and read of all men."

The narrative is full of incidents, with which are interspersed many
most judicious reflections; and in the "Conclusion" we have a correct
and complete delineation of Mr. I.'s character. We are deliberately of
opinion that it could not have been intrusted to better hands than those
of his esteemed colleague in the gratuitous secretaryship of the Irish
Institution, who has executed his task in a very pleasing and edifying
manner, with great delicacy and fidelity; much to the credit of his own
piety, judgment, and taste. We are happy to add that the work is very
neatly got up, very correctly printed, and ornamented with a good
likeness of our deceased brother.

Mr. I.'s ministry was greatly blessed from on high. The congregation was
never before so large, new members were added continually, and the place
of worship was considerably enlarged.

    "From the records of the church it appears that during his pastorate
    more than eight hundred were added to its fellowship. Twenty young
    men were encouraged to give themselves to the work of the Christian
    ministry, four of whom received missionary appointments, and two are
    at this time in Ireland, zealously exerting themselves in the
    service of the Baptist Irish Society." p. 314.

And, in a letter dated in 1826, Mr. I. says, "The church now consists of
more than 470 members." p. 192.

Of the great labour of his life, "The History of the English Baptists,"
in four large volumes, 8vo., we may venture to predict that it will be
far more in demand before this century closes than it is now. The
author, we believe, never received any thing like compensation while he
lived; he will be recompensed at the resurrection of the just. Mr. I.
believed, as did also the late Rev. James Dore, that when a man ceases
to be a strict Baptist, there is no resting-place for his feet till he
finds himself a strict papist.

But it cannot be justly maintained that our zealous brother shut himself
up within the narrow precincts of his own denomination. So far from it
that he had free and open communion with Christians of almost every
name. Soon after he came to London, he was elected a member of the
committee of the Religious Tract Society; and at the hospitable rooms of
Messrs. Hardcastle and Reyner, Old Swan Stairs, near London Bridge, he
cheerfully mingled with Churchmen, Dissenters, and Methodists, of every
shade and every grade; all agreeing, however, to insist upon the leading
doctrines of the gospel in all their publications. He was not, it is
true, in the habit of going "to the house of God in company" with Mr.
Taylor, the old Presbyterian Minister of Carter Lane, Doctors' Commons;
nor with Dr. Winter, the Congregationalist; nor with Richard Philips, of
the Society of "Friends;" nor with Mr. Butterworth, nor Dr. Adam Clarke,
of the Methodist connexion; but he often "took sweet counsel" with one
or another of these eminent persons; and with these more frequently than
with many others, because they were among his nearest neighbours while
his residence was in Harpur Street; nor was there among them all a more
resolute and determined advocate in the great cause of civil and
religious freedom, or in any of the pious and charitable institutions
which beautify and bless our native land.

The excellent volume before us will show that our beloved brother, when
most strenuously pleading for liberty, was quite alive to the claims of
all lawful authority. He was for "laws and liberties combined," nor ever
gave countenance to the daring and presumptuous schemes of any wild and
unprincipled demagogues in this or in the sister island. His political
creed, he has often been heard to say, was built upon the revolution of
1688, and the "Act of Settlement." He knew as well as any man what the
House of Brunswick owes to the Protestant Dissenters; and what the
Protestant Dissenters owe to the House of Brunswick. Let his printed
funeral sermon for the Princess Charlotte, and another for the duke of
Kent, and another for George the Third, be lasting monuments of the
ardent and affectionate loyalty which he himself so deeply felt, and
which he was assiduous to cherish in the ever-widening circle of his
acquaintance.

Many of his constant hearers must have been aware that their pastor's
heart and house were open to ministers and other friends from all parts
of England; to many from Wales, Scotland, and Ireland; and that his
correspondence with North America was frequent. But very few of them
probably could ever guess at the number of private applications that
were made to him by letter for his advice and assistance. No man was
more public; and yet, by early rising, and still more by a strong desire
to be useful, he had formed himself to habits of promptitude and
facility in the dispatch of business, that to ordinary minds were truly
surprising. Always alive and awake, he knew every thing that was done in
_London_ to promote the cause of Christ, or to hinder it. Enjoying the
confidence, and the occasional visits, of such men as Saffery and
Steadman, and Fuller and Hinton, and Kingborn and others, he was no
stranger to whatever occurred in the _country_.

May the amiable young pastor who succeeds, with all his brethren in
office, and every other member of the much-favoured church in Eagle
Street, long continue to flourish under the smiles of the Great Head of
the church, without whose gracious influence nothing is strong, nothing
is holy!

We might have added that Mr. Pritchard has appended to the Memoir a few
abbreviated sermons of our lamented friend, which, no doubt, will be
often read by those who heard them; and from which strangers may learn
something of the spirit and style of the minister at Eagle Street, in
his ordinary pulpit exercises on the Lord's-day, and on week-days.

If it be said, "Mr. Ivimey was sometimes wrong in temper, or wrong in
his measures," the answer is, "This may be easily said, and justly, of
every good man that breathes, who is in active life."

But, after making every concession that could be extorted from candour
and truth by the most jealous and jaundiced prejudice, we need not fear
to assert that much, very much, will remain, to excite admiration, and
gratitude to the great Author of all good, in his sincerity, clear as
crystal to the bottom; in his unquenchable zeal for the glory of God,
and the best interests of mankind; in the labour, the energy, and
unfainting perseverance with which he pursued his object; in the noble
disinterestedness which he evinced on all occasions;--and these, all
will admit, were the most prominent features of his character.

If this work meets with only half the attention it deserves, it will be
extensively read in this country and in America; and the zeal displayed
in the full-length portrait of "a good minister of Jesus Christ," will
provoke very many.

We had marked several striking passages for quotation; but, on
reconsidering the matter, deem it best to recommend the whole to all
those of our readers who have not already seen it.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Scripture Views of the Heavenly World._ By =J. Edmondson=, A.M.
    _pp._ 260.--Mason.

This work is written in a very serious, unpretending manner; and if it
do not greatly augment our knowledge of heaven, either as a place or a
state, yet it supplies such varied and valuable elements of thought, and
exhibits so much to enkindle ardent desire, that, as a volume of piety,
it deserves to rank high. We think, indeed, it is scarcely possible that
any one, whose affections are in any degree set upon the things which
are above, should read it without deriving considerable advantage. On
the sublime subject of heaven, the venerable author (for so we
understand we may denominate him) mentions twenty views:--"There is a
Heavenly World--Scripture Names of Heaven--God is present in Heaven--The
Presence of Jesus in Heaven--No Sufferings in Heaven--No Death in
Heaven--No Night in Heaven--No War in Heaven--Heaven is a holy
Place--Heaven is a happy Place--Heaven is a glorious Place--Happy
Employment in Heaven--Extensive Knowledge in Heaven--We shall know each
other there--Many Ranks and Orders in Glory--The Religion of Heaven is
Love--The Resurrection Body in Heaven--The Pleasures of Heaven are
pure--The Wicked are shut out of Heaven--Heaven is eternal."

The preface contains some succinct and sensible observations on the
immortality of the soul. Among others, the following occurs:--

    "Ideas of good and evil, right and wrong, are planted in the human
    heart. And there is in good men, what might be in all, a continual
    cleaving and approximation to the Deity. When sin is committed, it
    is followed by a sense of guilt and a fear of punishment, except in
    those hardened sinners who have debased themselves by a long course
    of disobedience. All these principles, when carefully cultivated,
    are accompanied with ardent longings after immortality; and they
    prove that man is connected with a higher order of beings than those
    who are around him here, and that he is designed for a higher state
    than that in which he now stands. For we perceive nothing of this
    kind among the inferior creatures of our world. They are not, nor
    ever will be, capable of knowing moral good and evil, much less of
    knowing the God who made them. And will man, with his superior
    powers, die for ever?"

Without pledging ourselves for the correctness of every sentiment or
sentence in the pages of this useful work, we would earnestly recommend
it to the attention of our readers generally.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Two Years' Residence in the New Settlements of Ohio, North America;
    with Directions to Emigrants._ By =D. Griffiths=, Jun. pp.
    197.--Westley and Davis.

The information and advice contained in this small volume must be very
valuable to those, especially, who contemplate a transition to Ohio,
with the intention of making it the place of their permanent abode. The
worthy author appears to have been a very diligent observer of men and
things during his short sojourn in the new world, and to have faithfully
recorded the result of his observations. Reason and experience unite to
testify that, in removing from place to place, little can be calculated
upon besides an exchange of one class of difficulties for another; and
in many more instances than are disclosed, it is highly probable that,
could the former be resumed, it would be thankfully accepted. Such, at
least, has been our impression from all the accounts we have yet read of
emigrants and emigration. For the edification of our readers we give the
following extract:--

    "It may surprise an Englishman, if he be unacquainted with the
    American character, that farmers, who were well off in New England,
    should leave a comfortable home for the wild woods of Ohio. The best
    explanation of this fact may be furnished, perhaps, by a comparison
    of the English and American character, given in an American
    publication, called 'The Biblical Repository,' although penned for
    another purpose. 'This is connected, no doubt, with a great feature
    of European character, which at once strikes Americans, that all
    ranks and classes there have a far _greater enjoyment of the
    present_ than ourselves. Our national character, so far as we have
    one, consists in a spirit of enterprise, excited by the desire of
    improving our condition. It may be shortly styled a _love of
    gain_--gain, not only of wealth, but also of reputation, of comfort,
    of happiness; gain of all that is supposed to be desirable. Our
    enjoyment consists more in striving after this gain, in
    anticipations and in the very act of acquiring; theirs, in
    possession and quiet fruition.' Local attachments, domestic comfort,
    and almost every kind of present temporal happiness, in the English
    sense of the term, give way to the love of gain. Unquestionably,
    this was the principle which led many of the New Englanders to Ohio;
    and certainly the organ of acquisitiveness must be very prominent in
    the Yankee cranium, for I never met with a farmer there, however
    long he had been settled, or however comfortably, but would, from
    this same love of gain, sell out, and move away." p. 53.

More than eighty pages of this volume are devoted to the subjects of
"Temperance Societies," and "Religious Revivals:" these should certainly
obtain close attention from the reader. Concerning the latter there
will, no doubt, still be much difference of opinion; yet, if it be
indulged with candour, and expressed with affection, it may be rather
beneficial than injurious.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Twenty Sermons._ By the late Rev. =W. Howels=, Minister of Long
    Acre Episcopal Chapel. pp. 440.--Shaw.

It is to be lamented that the reputation of the deceased so often
suffers from the defective prudence of the surviving. We have no doubt
that these sermons were delivered from the pulpit by the respected
individual whose name they bear, and that, by those who knew and valued
him as a preacher, they may be read with pensive pleasure and real
advantage. But we have also no doubt that, could Mr. Howels have been
consulted, he would have refused his consent to their publication, till
they had been submitted to his careful and severe revision. That they
contain many admirable sentiments and sentences, we readily admit; but,
unhappily, some of the most striking and valuable paragraphs are
seriously injured by rash and inconsiderate expressions, which an
extemporaneous and energetic speaker, in the fervour of oral
communication, may be induced to utter, but through which, were he
preparing his discourses for the press, and therefore for cooler
inspection, his pen would be unsparingly drawn. Without having said thus
much, we could neither have discharged our duty to ourselves nor our
readers; but with such cautionary intimation we can cordially commend
them to their perusal.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _The Domestic Harp._ By =David Ives=. pp. 80.--Baynes.

The worthy author of this small neat publication says, "A few of these
pieces have appeared before, in a periodical, called 'The Christian's
Pocket Magazine.'" He remarks, also, in his short preface, "No glossary
will here be required, but one member of a Christian family may safely
read them to another with the certainty at least of being understood;
and, the author feels a satisfaction in adding, without the danger of
offending the most sacred affection." The reader of these verses will
find that, while the preceding commendation is fully sustained, the
author might have gone even further. But as he has not, we will. These
poetical effusions are not only plain and pious, they are sensible and
instructive; and though they may not exactly range with the more lofty
efforts of poetic genius, yet they contain passages and pieces which
would not suffer by comparison with many which might be referred to in
more splendid volumes, the product of illustrious names. The following
specimen is selected, not on account of its superiority, but because it
best suits our space.


                           LINES FOR AN ALBUM.

    "When thinking on the ways of man,
      This little rule did rise,--
    That he who lives without a plan,
      Will die without a prize.

    Reflection still to those who hear
      This further guide hath given,--
    That the best plan is godly fear,
      And the best prize is heaven."

       *       *       *       *       *

    _The Sacred Classics. Expositions on the Creed, the Lord's Prayer,
    and the Ten Commandments; with Two Discourses on Matthew xxii.
    37-39, and Hebrews iii. 10. To which are added Expository Lectures
    on Psalm xxxix._ By =Robert Leighton=, D.D., Archbishop of Glasgow.
    With an Introductory Essay, by =John Pye Smith=, D.D., pp. 292.
    Hatchard.

The distinguished names inscribed on the title-page of this volume of
the "Sacred Classics" cannot be rendered more eminent by our
commendation. The praise both of the deceased and the surviving is in
all our churches; and their works, we doubt not, will continue to edify
and adorn the human mind from generation to generation.


                  BRIEF NOTICES OF RECENT PUBLICATIONS.

_The Works of William Cowper, his Life and Letters, by William Hayley,
Esq., now first completed by the Introduction of Cowper's Private
Correspondence; Edited by the Rev. T. S. Grimshawe, A.M., Rector of
Burton, Northamptonshire, and Vicar of Biddenham, Bedfordshire; Author
of the Life of the Rev. Legh Richmond. Saunders and Otley._--We have
received the early volumes of this admirable publication. The manner in
which it is brought out is highly creditable to all the parties
concerned in the undertaking; and we have no doubt of its being in very
extensive demand by readers of almost every description. It is our
purpose to watch its progress, and, at the close, to present our readers
with a more enlarged account of its peculiar claims to their attention.

_The Posthumous Letters of the Rev. Rabshakeh Gathercoal, late Vicar of
Tuddington; now first published, with Explanatory Notes, and dedicated
to the Lord Bishop of London. p. 288. Westley._--There are many passages
in these letters which, in the keenness of their satire, and the
pungency of their wit, cannot be exceeded by any thing in the writings
of Butler, South, or Swift; with this further commendation, that their
edge and point are directed exclusively against error and arrogance. On
the subject of dissent we have seen no recent publication which can be
compared with this in clearness, copiousness, and power; combining so
many important facts of history with so much of interesting and
practical influence. In the presence of such a writer the advocates of
superstition and intolerance must quail; but the admirers of the
uncorrupted Christianity of the New Testament, of every denomination,
will hail him, in this labour of his hands, as the intrepid friend of
freedom and religion.

After all, we are praying and anxiously looking for a period, when works
of this description shall have become obsolete; when ignorance shall be
entirely dissipated, and the "true light" universally shine: for the
knowledge of the Lord shall have covered the earth, as the waters cover
the sea; and man shall no longer say to his neighbour, Know ye the Lord:
for then, all shall know him, from the least to the greatest.

_The Great Case of Tithes truly stated, clearly opened, and fully
resolved. By Anthony Pearson, a Justice of Peace in Westmoreland, in the
time of the Commonwealth. Harvey and Darton._--This very cheap and
seasonable tract is No. 63, and is printed for the Tract Association of
the Society of Friends. It cannot fail to excite attention.

_Suggestions on National Education, with a View to the Advantage, not
only of the Poor, but of all Classes of Society. By John Smith, Lecturer
on Education, Liverpool. Simpkin and Marshall._--This very sensible
writer maintains that Government ought to do that which no individual
has power to do, namely, to show the public what education really is,
and the best modes of carrying it forward--that the teachers of the
millions have yet to be created. He urges the necessity, the
practicability, and the benefit of his plan. We hope ere long this great
subject will have a free, full, and fair discussion in the House of
Commons.

_Reasons for Dissenting from the Church of England; showing that the
Ancient Jewish Theocracy is no Authority for an Ecclesiastical
Establishment, &c. &c. By a Country Farmer and Minister of God's Word
and Ordinances. Simpkin and Marshall_--Though we dissent from this
Dissenter in various particulars, we think every reader will see that
the "Country Farmer" is quite an overmatch for the clergyman who paid
him a visit.

_The Life of the Rev. Jean Frederic Nardin, Pastor of the Church at
Blamont: Translated from the French. By the Rev. Robert Blessley. Ward
and Co._--We have perused this little tract with the liveliest interest;
and cordially thank Mr. Blessley for translating, and Mr. T. Lewis for
recommending it. It contains an excellent example for pious young men;
and especially for those of them who are students in divinity, pastors,
itinerant preachers, and missionaries.

_The Spirit of Holiness: Four Sermons. By James Harrington Evans,
Minister of John Street Chapel. pp. 168. Griffiths._--These plain,
evangelical sermons are entitled to serious perusal. We think them well
calculated to instruct, to reprove, and to console.

_Memoir of the Rev. Basil Woodd, M.A. By the Rev. S. C. Wilks, M.A._--An
excellent Memoir, published by the Religious Tract Society.

_Puritan Farm; or Old Ways kept up in New Times. By a Puritan Family.
Ward and Co._--A very entertaining little work. We hope it will be
continued. The "spoundings" of the female labourer on the burial of
Christ are charming, and the character of the great Dr. Owen is
developed with much judgment and taste.

_A Manual of English Grammar, Philosophical and Practical, &c. &c. By
the Rev. J. M. McCullock, A.M., Minister of Kelsoe. Second Edition,
revised. Simpkin and Marshall._--We are glad to see a reprint of this
excellent "Manual," the first edition of which we recommended to the
public not many months since.

_Memoirs of a Sergeant, late in the Forty-third Light Infantry Regiment,
previously to and during the Peninsular War; including an Account of his
Conversion from Popery to the Protestant Religion. pp. 278._ Mason.--Of
its kind, this is certainly a very respectable work; but the sieges, and
battles, and wounded, and slain, are so many, that it was quite a relief
to arrive at the end of the terrible detail. Perhaps some would choose
to call it interesting; and we do not mean to say that there are not
connexions in which it may be properly so contemplated. The pious
reader, however, cannot fail to have his mind so deeply affected, as his
eye glances over these pages, by the consideration of that which is the
cause of war, and of every other calamity which has desolated the earth,
as greatly to qualify his gratification arising from martial sounds,
glittering arms, or military evolutions.

Towards the close of the volume there are some observations which
deserve attention from the members of the Peace Society; and all serious
persons will read with pleasure the author's account of his conversion.
We hope he may live long to fight the good fight of faith, and finally
die more than a conqueror.

_Essay on the Habitual Exercise of Love to God, considered as a
Preparation for Heaven. By Joseph John Gurney. pp. 165. Seeley & Co._ No
one whose mind is under a sacred influence, can rise from the perusal of
these pages without a consciousness of having been admitted into
privileged society. The principles, spirit, and tendency of this work,
are eminently important. Were they but permitted to exercise that
practical dominion over the judgment and conduct of men generally, to
which they are fully entitled, a change as marvellous as beneficial
would be the result; in the evidence of which its divine nature and
origin would be abundantly manifested. The work is divided into the
following sections:--"General Remarks on Meetness for the Heavenly
State--On the Contemplation of God in Nature and Providence--On the
Contemplation of God in Redemption; the Father, the Son, the Spirit--On
Communion with God--On Submission to the Will of God, and Conformity to
his Attributes--On Love towards Man--Conclusion." Our sincere wish is
that this work may obtain a very extensive circulation.

_Helen of Coquetdale, or the Fair Bondager; a Tale, in two Cantos: with
a few other Fragments, in Verse. By a late Fellow of Oriel College,
Oxford. pp. 140. Oliphant._--The principal article in this small volume
contains many pious and some excellent passages; yet, as a whole, we
fear it is not destined to be a favourite. We scarcely know what to say
as to public taste, in relation to poetry, in the present day, except
that we are apprehensive it is too refined to be attracted with the
versification, &c. of "Helen of Coquetdale." We were ourselves much more
favourably impressed with two or three of the minor pieces.

_Illustrations of the Bible, &c. Part 12. Churton._--The continuation of
these admirable engravings is entitled to, and we hope is receiving,
enlarged public attention and support. The following are the
illustrations contained in the twelfth part: "Belshazzar's Feast--The
peaceable Kingdom--Esther kissing the Sceptre--Death of
Absalom--Solomon's Charge--The Death of Sampson--Jonah cast into the
Sea--Hezekiah beholding the Sun-dial."

_1. Fruits and Flowers. By the Author of the "Wheatsheaf." pp. 212.
Darton._

_2. The Garden. By the Compiler of "Fruits and Flowers," and the
"Wheatsheaf." pp. 263. Darton._--These elegant little volumes cannot but
be highly acceptable, especially to our pious young readers; they
contain such a selection of prose and verse, presented in a form so
attractive, that we may fairly presume upon their becoming favourites to
a very great extent.

_Sober Views of the Millennium. By the Rev. Thomas Jones, of Creaton,
Northamptonshire. Seeley and Burnside._--This little work answers to its
title in a very great degree. Let the Millennarians be induced soberly
to read and consider its contents.

_The Christian Journal. Conducted by Members of the Relief Church._--No.
27, for March last, contains a Review of Mr. Anderson's Funeral Sermon
for Dr. Carey, and several other highly interesting articles.


                                OBITUARY.

                            MR. H. H. FREEMAN

Henry Hawkins Freeman was born at South Sydenham, in Devonshire, in the
year 1767, where he resided under the parental roof until he attained
the age of sixteen, when he was placed as an apprentice to a
ship-builder at Plymouth, whom he faithfully served; during which time
he occasionally, with worldly companions, sought pleasure on the
Lord's-day; but has declared he found no gratification therein: but on
the contrary, his conscience witnessed against him when so engaged, and
left him miserable. His cousin, Mr. Henry Hawkins, Baptist minister of
Stroud, Gloucestershire, then residing at Plymouth, exhorted him to
attend the means of grace, and seek the salvation of his soul. While
attending the Baptist chapel, How's Lane, under the pastoral care of the
late Philip Gibbs (for whom he cherished a strong affection), the Lord
was pleased to meet with him. The sermon blessed to his conversion was
from Numb. xxiii. part of the 10th verse: "Let me die the death of the
righteous," &c. The observation of the preacher, that unless he lived
the life, he could not die the death, of the righteous, fastened upon
his mind. He felt he was a sinner before God, and was led to cry for
mercy, which he obtained through Christ. He united himself to the people
of God, and, through divine grace, was enabled to walk consistently, so
that the enemies of religion have acknowledged him to be a good man. He
was a friend to peace, and possessed a meek and quiet spirit. For many
years he filled the office of a deacon. In 1820, he was removed by
Providence to Honduras; and during his stay there, it may be said of
him, "He was a light in a dark place." He felt much pleasure in
directing the negroes to the Lamb of God; and, although for four months
at a time, in the interior of the country, and with no companions but
the sons of Africa and his Bible, he was quite happy, and declared that
"the word of the Lord was precious to him in those days."

Towards the end of 1822 he returned to England, and united himself with
the Baptist church in Little Prescot Street, London. In the kind
affections of many of its members he still lives. He often rejoiced in
spirit that God had called nearly all his children, and made them
partakers with himself of like precious faith.

The Lord was pleased to remove by death, July 16, 1833, the partner of
his life, after a union of thirty-seven years, which he severely felt;
from which period he rapidly declined. He was not fond of speaking of
himself; but feeling a lively sense of love to his Redeemer, he was
constrained to speak of it, and would often say he could appeal to his
Saviour as Peter did, "Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that
I love thee." About a month before his decease, he observed to a
minister, "Though the earthly house of this my tabernacle be dissolved,
I have a building of God," &c.

He was seized with epileptic fits on Tuesday, August 26, 1834, while on
a visit to his daughter at Aylesbury. After the first fit, he became
sensible for a few minutes, when a pious friend, sitting at his
bed-side, asked him if he was happy. To which he replied, "Yes." The
friend expressed a hope that the gospel, which had been his support
through life, would be his comfort in his extremity. To which he
emphatically returned the same answer. On being asked if he would give
up his hope for ten thousand worlds, he replied, "No, Sir." On referring
to a sermon he had heard on the Sabbath previous, the good man said,
"You know Christ is an ever-present Friend. He will not leave you now. I
hope you will still look to him." He said, "There is no other refuge."
These were his last words. A return of the fits came on; and, after
lying until Thursday morning, the 28th, at 5 o'clock he fell asleep in
Jesus, to wake no more until the morning of the resurrection.

He was removed to London, and interred in a vault under Wycliffe Chapel,
September 2nd, and his funeral sermon was preached by Mr. Stovel the
following Sabbath, from the portion of sacred writ blessed to his
conversion.


                          RELIGIOUS INTELLIGENCE.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                FOREIGN.

                                 CANADA.

               _Extract of a Letter from Mr. John Edwards.
                                    Clarence, Jan. 5, 1835._

In alluding to the work of grace in Breadalbane referred to in Mr.
Fraser's letter, inserted in April number, he says: "Since (it began)
the work has been progressing in a manner quite unprecedented in these
parts. From August to November nine persons who had been in a
backsliding state were restored, and eight new converts were baptized
and added to the church. During last month (December) forty-one have
also been baptized, making a total of fifty-eight, added since August. I
left the settlement last Friday, when Mr. Fraser assured me there were
twenty-two, in addition to the above number, whom he had good reason to
believe were converted characters; besides a number under convictions.
Among the subjects of this work is the man of grey hairs nearly eighty
years of age, and the child of thirteen, and many younger, under deep
convictions. The most astonishing feature in this work of grace appears
amongst the youth at school. There are more than forty children
attending it, and instead of vanity and trifling, sedateness and
seriousness now mark their behaviour. When spoken to of divine things,
they are all attention, and so eager to be instructed, that it is with
difficulty they can be prevailed on to leave school. Mr. F. told me,
that when passing the school one evening at ten o'clock, he found a
number of the boys holding a religious meeting; it was the second time
they had met for this purpose, unknown to any body. He now devotes one
evening of the week to their peculiar benefit. He farther assured me,
that he was satisfied six of these dear youths had experienced a change
of mind, and nearly all the scholars seem deeply concerned for the
salvation of their souls. So general has been the awakening, that very
few of the hearers remain unconcerned about their souls.

Referring to the means of this awakening, he says,--"They set apart a
day for fasting and prayer: they humbled themselves before God, and he
was entreated of them. In the month of November one of their number went
to Montreal, and told our brother the state of things. He immediately
wrote to a devoted and worthy brother, who is pastor of the Baptist
church at Fort Covington, New York (near the boundary line). They met,
the following week, at Breadalbane, and spent four days faithfully and
affectionately stating the truth. All secular affairs were laid aside,
and one concern occupied the attention of old and young, which was the
"one thing needful."

Of several interesting incidents connected with this work, I will
mention one. Mr. Gilmore, on his way to the settlement, called on a
pious lady, who lives fourteen miles from it, and told her of the
intended meeting. Her servant is the daughter of an Irish Catholic, who
lives at Breadalbane. The lady told her she must go to the meeting; and
directed her to ask permission for her sister, who lives in a place of
service adjoining, to accompany her. Leave being granted, the lady took
the girls into her room, and prayed for them most earnestly, that the
means of grace they were about to enjoy might be blessed to their
conversion. They attended during the meeting, and on going home from one
of the services they were accompanied by one of their former associates,
who had been lately converted; on their way she pressed on their minds,
with much earnestness, the truths they had been hearing; and before
parting with them, took them a little off the road, kneeled down on the
snow, and prayed fervently for their conversion. This, to them, was an
additional proof of the reality of the solemn truths they had just
heard. Before leaving the settlement, they called on Mr. F., and told
him the state of their minds, and he believes they returned to their
places converted characters.

       *       *       *       *       *

                               +DOMESTIC.+

                            PUBLIC MEETINGS.

                 WESLEYAN METHODIST MISSIONARY SOCIETY.

The annual meeting of this Society was held on Monday, May 4th, in
Exeter Hall. John Hardy, Esq., M.P., in the Chair.

The business of the day was opened, with singing and prayer, by the Rev.
J. Taylor, Chairman of the Conference.

The hall was crowded to excess, and hundreds sought admission in vain.

The Rev. Dr. Bunting read the Report, which, though described as an
abstract, was of very great length. It commenced by stating that the
society had twenty-four missionaries and six scripture-readers in
Ireland. They had established schools, at which 7,000 children were
receiving daily instruction, many Roman Catholic families preferring to
send their children there rather than to schools of their own
persuasion. In Sweden, much good has been achieved, and much more might
reasonably be expected, as schools had been established. A society had
also been founded for the purpose of opposing the doctrine of the
heathen; this society had received the Royal sanction, as well as the
support of the principal Bishops, who employed a Wesleyan Missionary as
their Secretary. In Germany also much progress had been made. There was
one society, consisting of 395 persons, and many others were in a state
of probation. In France also the cause of true Christianity was rapidly
advancing. Last year there was in one district a Wesleyan Society
consisting of 268 members, but this year it had increased to 464
persons, of whom only 70 were English. In Paris seven schools had been
established, and there was an ample opening for five more. There was
also in Paris an Auxiliary Society, by whom 25,000 French tracts have
been circulated, in addition to which 400_l._ had been collected there.
In Spain also the circulation of the Scriptures was making considerable
progress. At Gibraltar a chapel has been built on ground furnished by
Government, and was fully attended by the military. A school was
likewise established, at which 30 children attended daily. The
missionary in Spain wrote 35 letters to the booksellers and others of
the principal towns, calling upon them to become venders of the Holy
Scriptures on commission. One bookseller replied that he should feel
honoured by executing such a commission, not only in his own town, but
on any part of the Peninsula. The missionary having travelled into
Spain, described the moral condition of the great mass of the people as
most deplorable, the light of the Scriptures being altogether hid from
them. In Seville there were 90,000 Roman Catholics, 70,000 of whom
attended neither mass nor confession. Many of these had fallen back upon
infidelity and free-thinking as a refuge from the mummeries of popery.
One Spanish prelate had distributed 3,000 Spanish Bibles in his
district, observing that the battle was not now against Luther or
Calvin, but against Antichrist. Protestants and Catholics, he said, had
an equal hope of salvation, as they both professed the essential
doctrines of Christianity. At Malta, the society was progressing, but at
Alexandria the missionary was withdrawn for the present, it being quite
hopeless for one person to make any progress, particularly when the
ravages making by the plague were taken into consideration. In the South
Seas, particularly in New Zealand and the Friendly Islands, the
missionaries had made the most astonishing approaches to the general
establishment of Christianity. Much good had also been effected both in
Southern and Western Africa, and the West Indies; in the island of
Ceylon they had 10 missionaries, and the Scriptures were translated and
circulated, and schools were established at which 4,000 children were
receiving daily instruction. The prejudices of the people had been
boldly met, and idolatry had been shaken to its foundation. In the West
Indies they had 76 missionaries, but it was hoped they would be
increased to 100, for whose labours there was an ample field. They were
preaching God's holy word to 800,000 of their fellow-creatures just
emancipated from that sin and shame and curse of the country--slavery.

After some details, the Report went on to say, there were 260
missionaries divided between 170 missionary stations. There were 48,304
members, and 37,965 children were educated by the body. The amount of
the year's revenue was 53,437_l._ 15_s._ 2_d._, being an increase on the
former year to the amount of 1,204_l._ 8_s._ 2_d._ This did not include
the splendid legacy of Horatio Cock, of Colchester, which was one-eighth
of his whole fortune, amounting to 5,274_l._; this, with special
contributions, raised the year's revenue to 60,865_l._ 15_s._ but the
average would be about 54,000_l._

Lord Mountsandford, Sir Andrew Agnew, Bart., the Rev. J. Clayton, the
Rev. Theodore Drury (Vicar of Keighley), the Rev. J. Dixon (of
Liverpool), the Rev. Dr. Codman, (one of the Deputation from America),
the Rev. Professor Tolock (of Berlin), the Rev. Mr. Williams (a
missionary from the South Seas), the Rev. Dr. Humphry (President of
Amherst College, in the United States), the Rev. W. Reilly (of Dublin),
the Rev. R. Newton (who was loudly applauded), Henry Pownall, Esq., W.
G. Scarth (of Leeds), Thomas Palmer, Esq., the Rev. John McLean, the
Rev. R. Alder, and the Rev. M. Wilson, addressed the meeting, which
lasted from 11 until a quarter past 5 o'clock: after which thanks were
voted to the Chairman.

       *       *       *       *       *

                     CHRISTIAN INSTRUCTION SOCIETY.

The subscribers and friends to this Institution held their tenth
anniversary at Finsbury chapel, on Tuesday, the 5th of May. Long before
the time appointed for taking the chair, this spacious building was
crowded by a most respectable audience.

At six o'clock the Earl of Chichester took the chair, and the services
were commenced by praise and prayer.

The Secretary read the Report, from which it appeared that, during the
past year, 566 copies of the Holy Scriptures had been circulated, 1662
cases of distress had been relieved, and 2976 children had been induced
to attend various schools. At the present time there were 75
Associations, having 1630 visitors, attending 40,666 families, and
holding 91 prayer-meetings. To supply the increasing appetite for
religious and moral books apparent in the lower classes, the Committee
had provided a series of Loan Libraries. There were now fifty such
libraries, each containing fifty volumes. Several interesting facts,
showing the benefit which had resulted from local prayer-meetings, the
loan of tracts, and open-air preaching, were adduced. The mission to
resident foreigners, announced at the last meeting, and conducted by Dr.
Giustiniani, had been attended with the most salutary benefit. Repeated
attempts had recently been made, with considerable encouragement, to
visit the jails and poor-houses. Supplies of tracts and other
publications had been granted to several country Associations.

Thomas Challis, Esq., then stood forward and presented his accounts as
Treasurer, from which it appeared, that the balance due to the Treasurer
at the last Anniversary was L126 2s. 9d.; the total receipts during the
past year amounted to L1,041 19s. 4d.; the expenditure to L1,024 0s.
1d.; leaving the balance now due to the Treasurer L108 3s. 6d.

The Rev. J. Leifchild, T. Binney, J. Burnet, C. Stovel, J. Williams, T.
Morell, J. Blackburn; also C. Lushington, Esq., M.P., and H. Dunn, Esq.,
in animating and appropriate speeches urged the claims of this Society
on the attention of the Meeting.

       *       *       *       *       *

                    ECCLESIASTICAL KNOWLEDGE SOCIETY.

The sixth anniversary of the Society for promoting Ecclesiastical
Knowledge was held in Finsbury chapel, Moorfields, on Wednesday evening,
the 6th of May. Dr. Brown was in the chair.

After prayer by the Rev. A. Fletcher, and some introductory remarks by
the Chairman, the Rev. Dr. Bennett read a report, which consisted
chiefly of an exposition and defence of the principles and operations of
the Society. It excited deep interest, and drew forth repeated
expressions of applause.

The receipts by subscriptions, donations, and collections, amounted to
L180 4s. 6d.; and the sale of books, to Dec. 31, 1834, amounted to L128
11s. 8d. The disbursements were, printing, publication, paper, and
copy-rights, L254 2s. 7d.; postages, advertisements, books for review,
&c., L26 4s. 5d.; commission and advertisements for publications, L28
8s. 8d.; balance in hand, L3 8s. 10d. Their new monthly publication, =The
Ecclesiastical Journal=, had more than paid its expenses, and the Society
was not in arrears, either to printers, or to other tradesmen. The only
arrear was the remuneration which, in honour, was due to those who had
furnished important communications.

The Rev. C. Stovel, T. Scales, of Leeds, Mr. Davis, Blackfriars; also
Mr. Brown, of Wareham, D. Wire, Esq., H. Thompson, Esq., B. Hanbury,
Esq., G. Hadfield, of Manchester, and A. Pellatt, Esq., severally
defended the principles of the Society, and showed the necessity for its
existence.

       *       *       *       *       *

                   BRITISH AND FOREIGN BIBLE SOCIETY.

The thirty-first Anniversary Meeting of this Society was held on
Wednesday, the 6th of May, at the great room of Exeter Hall, and was
more numerously attended than any meeting since the formation of the
Society. Long before the chair was taken, notwithstanding the
unfavourable state of the weather in the morning, every part of the
hall, save a few seats reserved on the platform, was so closely
occupied, as in many instances to be inconvenient to the parties; but
even with that inconvenient pressure, there was not sufficient room for
all who claimed admittance. Under these circumstances it was determined
that the lower room should be opened for those who could not gain
admission into the greater, and that after the Report had been read to
the large meeting, it should be taken down and read in the lower room,
where the Treasurer of the Society, John Thornton, Esq., had consented
to take the chair. Several distinguished supporters of the Society
kindly acceded to the suggestions made to them, that they should deliver
their addresses to the meeting in the lower room. Amongst these were the
Hon. and Rev. Baptist Noel, Rev. C. Daley, Rev. G. Clayton, and the
Rev. Dr. Morison.

At eleven o'clock Lord Bexley, the President of the Society, came on the
platform. His Lordship was accompanied on the platform by the Marquis
Cholmondeley, the Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, Lord Lorton, Lord
Mountsandford, Lord Teignmouth, Rt. Rev. the Bp. of Ohio, the Rev.
Archdeacon Corrie, the Rev. J. W. Cunningham, Mr. Plumptre, M.P., Mr.
Hardy, M.P., Mr. Lushington, M.P., and many other distinguished
supporters of the Society.

The Secretary, the Rev. A. Brandram, read the Report, which gave
statements and extracts from the communications of correspondents in
various parts of the world, describing the progress of Bible
distribution in those places during the year. The distribution by the
Paris Bible Society had, in the year just closed, amounted to 62,194
Bibles and Testaments; the distribution of the previous year had not
exceeded 55,666. The accounts from Paris contained also most gratifying
intelligence of the progress of the Society in Switzerland, in some
parts of which a distribution to the amount of 27,000 copies had been
effected by two of the Society's colporteurs. It appeared from extracts
from Dr. Pinkerton's report of the distribution of Bibles and Testaments
in the North of Europe, that 27,935 copies had been distributed last
year in the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, German, Polish, and other languages,
and that a considerable number of these had found their way into the
hands of Roman Catholics. After adverting to the satisfactory progress
of Bible distribution in other parts of Germany, in Sweden, and Russia,
the principal Bible Society of which latter place had already
distributed 717,977 copies of the Sacred Scriptures, the Report adverted
to the state of Portugal and Spain. In the former country there was now
no persecution for religious opinion, but every man was allowed to
choose which religion he pleased, and to worship God according to the
dictates of his own conscience. In the Islands of the Mediterranean and
in Greece, the distribution of the Holy Scriptures had gone on
favourably, and the prospect was equally favourable in Moldavia,
Wallachia, Bucharest, and part of Persia. In Calcutta, and other parts
of the East Indies, there had been a much greater than ordinary
distribution of Bibles and Testaments, and larger collections had been
made to forward the objects of the Society. The accounts from New South
Wales, and the Islands of the Pacific, were also most satisfactory. Two
translations of the New Testament into the language of the different
Islands of the Pacific had been brought to this country by the Rev. Mr.
Yate and the Rev. Mr. Williams, and were now being printed by the
Society. After going into some details from the accounts from Africa,
which were on the whole favourable, the Report observed that they were
the reverse in the States of South America. The attention of the Society
had, during the last year, been greatly directed to the West Indies,
with the view of an extensive distribution of the Scriptures to such of
the newly emancipated negroes as could read. An extra subscription of
L15,000 had been raised for the purpose of promoting that object without
interfering with the general funds of the Society. The Report proceeded
to give extracts from the communications from several islands, showing
the earnest desire of the negroes to avail themselves of every
opportunity to obtain religious instruction. It added that the first
shipment made by the Society to that part of the world consisted of
73,695 copies of the Scriptures, the conveyance of which was given by
the owners of the vessels without any expense to the Society. From
returns from the Isle of France, it appeared that 60,000 negroes had
received civil freedom, not one in ten of whom knew how to read; and the
ignorance was, of course, great in proportion. Adverting to the progress
made by the North American Bible Society, the Report stated that its
receipts in the last year were 88,600 dollars; that its issue of Bibles
and Testaments exceeded 110,000 copies, bringing up the whole
distribution, since the commencement, to 1,113,000. The receipts of the
past year amounted to L107,926. 1s., being the largest amount ever
received in one year since the Society's first commencement. In that
amount there were two items, which could not be included in the
permanent income of the Society. The first was a legacy of L11,695. 12s.
9d. (less by the legacy duty), being a bequest of the late Horatio Cock,
Esq.; and the other a sum of L15,000, voted exclusively for the negro
fund. But when these were taken into account, the general subscriptions
of the Society would be found to be little less than those of the
previous year. In these were included a sum of L29,184. 13s. 7d., being
the amount of free donations from auxiliaries to the Parent Society. The
expenditure within the year was L84,249. 13s. 4d., leaving a balance
exceeding L23,000; but the engagements of the Society amount to above
L69,000. The distribution by the Society in the past year amounted to
653,604 Bibles and Testaments, and portions of the Holy Scriptures,
including those sent to the West Indies, &c.; but even after deducting
the latter, it would be found that there had been a considerable
increase of the issues in the last year as compared with the previous
years. The Report, after again adverting to the exertions made for the
West Indies, and the prospect held out that those exertions would, under
the Divine blessing, be attended with complete success in the religious
instruction of the negro, proceeded to state that the present year,
1835, was the third centenary anniversary of the first printing of an
English Bible. It then contrasted the state of society, and of England
generally of that day with those of the present, and deduced the moral
greatness of England now, compared with what it was then, to its
exertions to promote the free circulation of the Holy Scriptures. At
that time the number of copies in circulation was very small; the extent
of the demand in the present day, as contrasted with that, might be
judged of from this fact, that in one day last month orders had been
given for 365,000 copies of new editions.

Amongst the speakers were the distinguished individuals whose names have
been already mentioned, to which may be added, the Rev. Dr. Spring
(representative of the American Bible Society), J. Leifchild, W. Yate,
of the Church Missionary Society, Mr. Williams, and Hugh Stowell.

       *       *       *       *       *

                   BRITISH AND FOREIGN SCHOOL SOCIETY.

The thirtieth Anniversary of this Institution was held at Exeter Hall,
on Monday, the 11th of May. On no former occasion have we witnessed a
more numerous attendance.

At twelve o'clock Lord Brougham appeared on the platform, and was
received with long continued cheers.

Edward Dunn, Esq., the Secretary, read the Report, which commenced by
noticing the death of the late J. B. Wilson, Esq., who had been a warm
supporter of this Institution. By his will he had bequeathed to it the
reversion of L2,000 three per cents. It went on to state, that the
Society's premises had been altered and completed in a most satisfactory
manner, but the expense had exceeded that for which provision was made.
The model school carried on under the direction of Mr. Crosswell
continued to maintain its high character, and was a source of the
greatest satisfaction to the Committee. There had been scattered in the
country 103 young persons, who had received assistance from this
Society, without which they could not have been introduced to spheres of
active usefulness. Persons of various Dissenting denominations, and
members of the Established Church, had taken advantage of the
Institution, and had manifested in their conduct towards each other that
unity which bound all Christians together in the love and service of
their divine Master. A number of new schools had been opened with
considerable prospects of success. Since the last anniversary,
Government had made a second grant of L20,000 towards promoting
education, which had been accompanied by a difference in the mode of
distribution, so that the schools conducted on this system had obtained
only L6,800 of it. The Committee felt that whatever was done should be
on broad and general principles. Grants of slates, lesson books, and
other materials, had been made during the year. Fifty-nine schools,
educating 7,250 children, had been aided during the same period. The
report then reverted to the Society's foreign operations, and
particularly noticed the desire for instruction manifested by the
negroes in the West Indies. It concluded by adverting to the benefits
which the Institution had conferred on the country.

William Allen, Esq., presented his accounts, as Treasurer, from which it
appeared that the total receipts during the year were L2,645 10s.; the
expenditure amounted to L3,482 7s. 1d.; showing a deficiency upon the
general statement of the year of L836 17s. 1d. Those reports, he
observed, only showed the receipts and expenditure of the current year;
perhaps, on a future occasion, it would be advisable to give a statement
of the Society's assets, and carry on the balance.

The principal speakers on the occasion were, Mr. Ainsworth, M.P., Mr.
Pease, M.P., H. Pownall, Esq., Mr. Hume, M.P., C. Lushington, M.P.; Rev.
Messrs. G. Clayton, J. Burnet, Dr. Humphreys, J. Williams, and Professor
Vaughan; besides the noble Chairman, whose opening and closing address
imparted no ordinary interest to the meeting, and were listened to with
marks of the warmest approbation.

       *       *       *       *       *

  PROTESTANT SOCIETY FOR THE PROTECTION OF CIVIL AND RELIGIOUS LIBERTY.

The twenty-fourth anniversary of this important institution was held at
the City of London Tavern on Saturday, the 16th of May. On no former
occasion have we ever witnessed greater interest excited. At an early
hour every part of the large room was crowded, and hundreds retired,
unable to gain admission. On the platform we observed Mr. Brotherton,
M.P.; Mr. Alderman Wood, M.P.; Mr. Ewart, M.P.; D. W. Harvey, M.P.; Mr.
R. Potter, M.P.; Mr. J. Scholefield, M.P.; Mr. C. Lushington, M.P.; Mr.
J. Parrat, M.P.; Dr. Brown, and several dissenting ministers.

At twelve o'clock the arrival of Lord Brougham, who had been appointed
to preside on the occasion, was announced, and called forth the repeated
acclamations of the assembly. His Lordship immediately took the chair,
supported by John Wilks, Esq. on his right, and Mr. Alderman Wood on his
left.

And here we cannot help expressing regret that our limits will not allow
us to present our readers either with the opening or closing address of
the Noble Chairman on this occasion. Without pledging ourselves to the
correctness of every sentiment that was uttered, we have no hesitation
in affirming,--which is perhaps the highest eulogium in the fewest
words,--that these eloquent appeals were every way worthy of the
liberal, the enlightened, the energetic =Henry Brougham=; a name which,
whatever lustre it may derive from the title appended to it, will ever
be indebted for its highest and most gratifying honours, to the heart,
the intellect, and the character of the man.

For these speeches, together with those of Mr. O'Connell, Dr. Brown, J.
Wilks, C. Lushington, D. W. Harvey, the Rev. Messrs. Stowell, Hoppus,
Sibree, Morell, Dr. Morison, &c., &c., we must refer our readers to the
Patriot of the 20th ult., whose ample columns will afford them a
gratifying report of the meeting.

The following Resolutions were unanimously adopted:--

1. That to the great and benignant principles of Religious Freedom, =this
Society=, including many hundred congregations of Protestant Dissenters
of different denominations, in England and Wales, continue firmly
attached: That they must alway regard every interference with the rights
of conscience as offensive and unjust--as detrimental to general
happiness--and as calculated to produce those hypocrisies or martyrdoms
which wisdom and goodness abhor: And that such interference exists in
every age when perfect social equality, irrespective of religious
opinions and modes of worship, is not enjoyed; and in every country
where any civil advantage is bestowed, or prejudice inflicted, in
consequence only of religious opinions entertained, or modes of worship
preferred.

2. That such principles should be avowed by =this Society=, if they were
but humble and unconnected individuals, or if they constituted a small
minority in the State; but may be more confidently cherished, and more
boldly proclaimed, when Dissenters from the Established Church are great
in numbers, information, independence, activity, influence, and
wealth--when experience has demonstrated the wide and deep injuries
which other principles and practice produce--when the energies and
benefits of the _voluntary_ principle have been felicitously
evinced--and when the situation of other countries proclaims that
Religion and Religious Freedom best prosper together--and that no
secular alliances are needful to promote the happiest influences of
piety, or the progress of truth: and that, to disregard, or to
insufficient attention, to these principles, =this Meeting= mainly
attribute the numerous grievances which yet peculiarly affect Protestant
Dissenters, and the inadequate progress made by the Legislature and
successive Administrations towards their redress.

3. That among those grievances =this Meeting= include the continuance of
=Church Rates=, which they had hoped, ere now, would have ceased;--and to
which they object because these Church Rates press specially on peculiar
portions of the people--because they might be averted by a just
appropriation of property belonging to the Church--because they occasion
extensively irritating feuds, and local litigation--and because they are
peculiarly obnoxious to those parishioners who, conscientiously
dissenting from Church Establishments, erect and maintain their own
places of worship--and support their ministers--relieve the necessitous
of their communion--educate the young--and defray every congregational
expense, without asking or desiring assistance from the State, and at
their own spontaneous and voluntary charge. That in connexion with this
object, =this Meeting= sincerely express their condolence with =Mr. John
Childs=, of Bungay, in the imprisonment he is now enduring in the County
gaol at Ipswich, on account of his conscientious objection to the
payment of Church Rates--and also its abhorrence of the system which has
subjected to such cruel and unmerited sufferings, an individual who has
conferred great benefits on the cause of Religion and Morality by means
of the press.

4. That =this Meeting= also object to the continuance Of =the Marriage
Laws=, which for the solemnization of Marriage, drag Protestant and
Catholic Dissenters, in defiance of their conscientious aversion, or
doctrinal opinions, to the Altars of the Established Church--and regret
that their sound principles have not been regarded in the measures
propounded by the last and preceding Government, for their relief. And
while they acknowledge the courtesy their claims have received, they
express their belief that satisfaction will never ensue till all classes
have the option to consider Marriage as a religious solemnity, or as a
civil contract--and to have the religious solemnity celebrated by the
Ministers of the Congregations or Denomination to which they belong--nor
till Marriages may be registered by a civil officer with safety and
facility, and on economical terms.

5. That the want of a =National Civil Registration of Births, Marriages,
and Deaths=, is also among the wrongs which =this Society= have exposed
and deplore. That whilst they know that much-needed and incalculable
benefits would result to _the whole Empire_ by the improvement
required--that valuable statistical information would be supplied, and
all property become more secure--yet that the imperfections of the
present system are peculiarly oppressive and vexatious to Dissenters
from the Church, and that the evils they suffer must induce them to urge
for an efficient and immediate remedy with universal, anxious, and
unslumbering zeal.

6. That whilst =this Meeting= acknowledge the efforts made by a former
Administration, who have now succeeded to the Government, and by liberal
Members of the Legislature to remove the impediments which prevent
Dissenters from sharing the benefits and honours of our =National English
Universities=--they have yet to complain that the spirit of intolerance,
and of selfish and sectarian exclusion, has been triumphant; and that
even the Charter to the London University, founded on expansive and wise
principles, has been deferred: and especially as on the survey of Europe
and America, and even of Scotland, they discover that Colleges and
Universities, with powers of conferring degrees, have been numerously
and usefully established--and as they believe that the prevalence in
England of similar liberality would improve our national destinies, and
give cause both for Science and Religious Liberty to rejoice.

7. That many other matters prejudicial to Dissenters require
interposition and relief--as, 1. The absurd jurisdictions of the
Ecclesiastical Courts, and their powers to enforce by penance and
indefensible punishment the decrees they pronounce. 2. The liability of
Dissenters to provide substitutes if chosen church-wardens. 3. The heavy
charges arising from the want of some summary means of perpetuating the
Trusts of their Chapels, without the enormous tax from frequent
conveyances at present sustained. 4. The non-extension to them of the
remission of duties chargeable on the materials used in the erection of
their places for worship, which is allowed in favour of the churches and
chapels of the Established Church. 5. The powers of the clergy to
prohibit the tolling of the bell on the death or funeral of Dissenting
parishioners, and to refuse the admission of their corpses into the
church, and to read the Burial Service over those who die unbaptized,
though interred in the parish church-yard. 6. The exclusion of
Dissenting Ministers from officiating (as is permitted in Ireland) in
church-yards at the interment of friends. 7. The difficulty of
punishing, summarily, the interruptions of public worship by the
persecuting or profligate. And 8. The right of Clergymen, however
prejudiced, incompetent, and unpopular, officially to preside at
Vestries of parishioners; as well as other matters, diversified and
vexatious, which chiefly arise from the peculiar favour manifested to
the Established Church, and the withholdment of that perfect equality as
to civil rights between religionists of every class, for which =this
Society= will ever contend.

8. That with such various grievances, urgent and unredressed--and
regarding the dispositions manifested, by high ecclesiastical
authorities and parties proud in rank and power, to agitate the people
and the parliament by alarms for the Established Church, and to resist
even the reasonable concessions so justly required--and believing that a
crisis has arrived or is approaching, on which the early triumph or
temporary retrogression of the rights of conscience may depend--=this
Meeting= would urgently invoke Dissenters and Methodists, and all friends
to liberal principles, throughout the empire, to be up and stirring--to
prepare for new strifes and elections--to nominate and the return to
the House of Commons only such Representatives as will vindicate those
rights firmly and with zeal--and to afford to the present Administration
the countenance and cooperation merited by their sacrifices and efforts
for Freedom and Reform, and which may enable them to do justice to
Ireland and Great Britain, by promptly correcting every ecclesiastical
and corporation abuse.--And that =this Meeting= regard with decided
approbation and gratitude the strenuous efforts now making in and out of
Parliament to remove the taxes upon knowledge, satisfied that there is
no greater obstacle than such taxes to religious liberty, as well as to
religious instruction.

9. That the following ministers and gentlemen of different denominations
constitute the Committee of the Society, with power to add to their
numbers, and appoint all other officers:

  Rev. F. A. Cox, LL. D.
  ---- W. B. Collyer, D.D. F.A.S.
  ---- George Collison
  ---- Alexander Fletcher, A.M.
  ---- Thomas Jackson
  ---- Thomas Lewis
  ---- John Morison, D.D.
  ---- Thomas Russell, A.M.
  Mr. Edward Ashby
  William Bateman, Esq.
  James Esdaile, Esq.
  Martin Prior, Esq.
  Thomas Wilson, Esq.
  Matthew Wood, Esq. M.P.
  John Wilks, Esq. M.P.
  James Young, Esq.

That cordial thanks be rendered to those by whom the duties of the
office have heretofore been fulfilled--and that James B. Brown, Esq.,
LL. D., be requested to become Treasurer to this Institution.

10. That the Meeting avail themselves gladly of another opportunity to
reiterate their grateful expressions to John Wilks, Esq., M.P., the
Honorary Secretary of the Society from the formation, for the zeal and
prudence he has displayed--and for the devotedness and ability with
which he has often resisted intolerance and persecution, and struggled
for that vital and glorious liberty, to which he has long proved himself
to be entirely attached.

11. That the Society cheerfully offer their acknowledgments to those
members of the Legislature who have presented their petitions and
laboured on their behalf; and hailing with gratification the presence at
this Meeting of =Joseph Brotherton=, Esq., M. P., =William Ewart=, Esq.,
M. P., =Daniel Whittle Harvey=, Esq., M. P., =Charles Lushington=, Esq.,
M. P., =Daniel O'Connell=, Esq., M. P., =Richard Potter=, Esq., M. P.,
=Joseph Scholefield=, Esq., M. P., =T. Thornely=, Esq., M.P., and
=Matthew Wood=, Esq., M.P., they hope during future efforts to receive
their unabated support.

12. That this Meeting are also rejoiced by the presence of the Rev. Dr.
Codman, the Rev. Dr. Humphrey, the Rev. Dr. Spring, and the Rev. Mr.
Baird from America--and congratulate them and the world on the proofs
supplied by their interesting, enlightened, and prosperous country in
favour of the voluntary principle in matters of religion, and which
demonstrate that her grace and glories may be well and widely diffused
without alliance to the State.

                                                   BROUGHAM, (Chairman.)

13. That =this Society=, who have hailed as Chairmen at preceding
Anniversaries some of the most distinguished Royal and Noble advocates
for Civil and Religious Liberty, feel peculiar pleasure in expressing
their gratitude and delight that =the Rt. Hon. Lord Brougham= has
presided at their Meeting this day. Assured of the cordiality and
success with which for many years, he has dedicated his intellect,
eloquence, and vast attainments, to the cause of Education--to the
abolition of Slavery--to the accomplishment of legal, corporate, and
public reforms--and to the general amelioration of his country and the
world--=the Meeting= are cheered by the interest he has manifested in
the claims and wrongs of the hundreds of thousands of their countrymen
whom they represent--and anticipate from the powerful support he can
supply that ere long victory will smile on their efforts, and that
knowledge, truth, and liberty will for ever prevail.

       *       *       *       *       *

                 THE LEICESTERSHIRE BAPTIST ASSOCIATION.

The Baptist churches in Leicestershire, formerly connected with the
Northamptonshire Association, which embraced most of the churches in the
counties of Derby, Rutland, Leicester, Nottingham, Lincoln, Buckingham,
Bedford, and Northampton, impressed with a conviction that its
efficiency was considerably impaired by its extent, thought it desirable
to form a separate Association, which should be more limited in its
range, and more definite end concentrated in its efforts.


In pursuance of this object, a meeting of ministers and deacons, with
their friends, was convened in the school-room of the Harvey Lane
chapel, Leicester, on Monday, November the 10th, 1834; when the
following resolutions were unanimously passed:--

1. That the churches of the Calvinistic Baptist denomination, assembling
at Arnsby, Appleby, Husband's-Bosworth, Loughborough, Harvey-Lane,
Leicester, Monk's-Kirby, Oadby, Sheepshead, and Sutton-in-the-Elms, do
now form themselves into a Union, to be called "=The Leicestershire
Baptist Association=."

2. That the great design of this Union be the promotion of the kingdom
of Jesus Christ; by holding meetings for mutual exhortation and united
prayer;--by affording opportunities for the cultivation of brotherly
love between the ministers and members of the several churches; by
endeavouring to advance the cause of the Redeemer throughout the county.

3. That this Association hold its meetings twice a year--on the Tuesday
in Easter week, and on the first Tuesday in November: and that they be
holden at each place connected with the Union in its turn; each minister
being expected to preach in his course. And that at the Spring meeting a
report of the state of the churches be received, and the business of the
Association transacted.

4. That with a view to the relief of cases of ministerial distress, to
assist in carrying the gospel into neglected villages, and to defray the
necessary expenses of the Association, a fund be established, sustained
by collections at the half-yearly meetings, as well as by private
subscriptions. And that a Committee of Management be formed, composed of
the ministers and deacons of the churches.

5. That all churches in the county or its vicinity, wishing to unite
with the Leicestershire Association, be requested to convey their
sentiments, either by letter or otherwise, through some member of the
Union, at one of its regular meetings; and that such applications be
attended to without delay.

6. That Mr. New, of Arnsby, be requested to act as Secretary, and Mr. C.
B. Robinson, of Leicester, as Treasurer, for the first year; and that
the Secretary be desired to give a fortnight's notice of each meeting to
the ministers or deacons of the churches.

The Association held its first meeting at Arnsby, on Easter Tuesday,
April 21. The services commenced, in the morning, at half-past ten
o'clock, when communications were received from different churches; in
the afternoon Mr. Aveline, of Loughborough, preached from Acts xvi. 5,
"_On the present state of religion in the churches, and the best means
of promoting its improvement:_" in the evening Mr. Mursell, of
Leicester, preached from 1 Cor. xv. 24. The services were numerously
attended, and left a very gratifying impression; from which it is hoped,
that the Union may be productive of considerable good.

The next meeting of the Association will be held at the Harvey Lane
chapel, Leicester, on the first Tuesday in November.

It is to be regretted that, from some misunderstanding, no numerical
report was received from many of the churches; consequently, the results
of the past year cannot be accurately recorded.

                                                  =J. New=, _Secretary_.

       *       *       *       *       *

                          WELLS, SOMERSETSHIRE.

The following important and interesting case of the Baptist Church in
the city of Wells, is respectfully submitted to the consideration of the
friends of Zion.

In the year 1814 a few persons, desirous of advancing the cause of
Christ in this populous city, opened a room for the preaching of the
gospel, which, being well attended, led to the purchase of some freehold
property, that was converted into a chapel and burial-ground, the cost
of which was L540. This case received the sanction of the ministers in
the neighbourhood, among whom were the Rev. Messrs. Ryland, Roberts,
Murch, Saunders, and Tidman.

Subsequent to the removal of the first minister, the Rev. J. P. Mursell
fixed his residence among them, and it pleased the great Head of the
Church to bless his labours to such a pre-eminent degree, that it became
absolutely necessary to build the present commodious chapel, which was
opened in October, 1827, by the Rev. Robert Hall.

The cause, from that period, has been growing, until the Rev. Mr.
Groser, their late pastor, embraced the _sentiments_ of Mr. Irving, and
renounced _believers' baptism_. Having given up his pastoral office over
this church, and opened another place of worship in the city, many of
the church and congregation followed him, which has placed this once
flourishing interest in peculiar difficulties with regard to the
finances. The sum expended in building the present chapel, including the
debt remaining on the first purchase, is as follows:--

  Purchase, Building, &c.               1190 15 7
  Subscriptions and Contributions        890 15 7
                                       ----------
  Balance due                            300  0 0
                                       ----------

The ministers in the neighbourhood have kindly afforded their aid, and
view this interest as one of no ordinary importance, since it presents
an extensive field for the exercise of genuine benevolence. The deacons
and friends, having the fullest confidence in the liberality of the
Christian public, respectfully solicit _early donations_, that they may
be freed from the payment of interest money, by the present debt being
liquidated, and thereby be enabled to give all their support to a
faithful minister of the everlasting gospel. This hope is greatly
strengthened by the consideration, that, through the blessing of God,
the congregation is increasing, and the prayer-meetings are well
attended. The following ministers will cheerfully receive contributions
for the above case:--Rev. S. Summers, T. S. Crisp, and T. Winter,
Bristol; J. Jackson, Bath; T. Clarke, Paulton, near Bath; J. Mason,
Norton St. Philip's, near Bath; J. P. Mursell, Leicester; T. Price,
London; J. S. Bunce, Devizes; W. Jones, and J. Dyer, Frome; and Mr. C.
Tyte, Watchmaker, Wells.

       *       *       *       *       *

                            CHAPELS OPENED.

                         KEYNSHAM, NEAR BRISTOL.

In the autumn of the last year it was found necessary to take down the
old meeting-house, its dilapidated state having rendered it unsafe to
worship in. A new one is erected on the same site, the internal
arrangements of which are much more commodious than those of the former.
It was opened for Divine worship on Tuesday, the 21st of April; on which
occasion, Mr. Summers, of Broadmead, Bristol, preached in the morning,
from 1 Cor. xiii. 12; Mr. Winter, of Counterslip, Bristol, in the
afternoon, from Matt. xiii. 16, 17; and Mr. Lucy, of Lady Huntingdon's,
Bristol, in the evening, from 1 Pet. iii. 18. The devotional services
were conducted by Messrs. John Jackson and James Jackson, of Bath,
Probert, of Bristol, and Fuller, of Hallen; Mr. Ayres, the pastor of the
church, closing the services of the day with prayer and thanksgiving.
The collection amounted to L32. The whole cost will be L700; about L300
remaining yet to be liquidated. The church and congregation, by no means
opulent, have exerted themselves to the utmost, and would feel
particularly grateful for such assistance from their Christian brethren
as should render it unnecessary for their pastor to leave them for the
purpose of soliciting contributions. They trust this new period in their
history will be the commencement of a brighter day than any which has
yet dawned upon them.

       *       *       *       *       *

                            THOVERTON, DEVON.

A new Baptist chapel was opened for Divine worship at Thoverton, October
2nd, 1834; when the Rev. S. Nicholson, of Plymouth, preached in the
morning; and the Rev. J. Baynes, of Wellington, in the evening. Mr.
Hoskins, minister of the place, was publicly ordained and recognized as
pastor of the church in the afternoon, when the Rev. P. Anstie, of
Exeter, described the nature of a Christian church; the Rev. S. S.
Hatch, of Honiton, asked the usual questions; the Rev. C. Sharp offered
the ordination prayer; the Rev. Dr. Payne (Indep.), of the Western
Academy, gave the charge; the Rev. Messrs. W. Blaudy (Indep.), C.
Bushby, and R. Pyne, took part in the devotional services, which were
numerously and respectably attended. This neat and substantial chapel,
measuring 49ft. by 32ft., including two school-rooms, a small
burying-ground, and expenses of writings, &c., cost only L480. Nearly
one-third of the amount has been already obtained; for the remainder Mr.
Hoskin is now soliciting the Christian public. The previous destitute
state of this neighbourhood, and its present promising appearance, give
it peculiar claims on their attention.

       *       *       *       *       *

                            SHREWTON, WILTS.

A new chapel was opened at Shrewton, Wilts, November 20, 1834. The Rev.
P. Saffery, of Salisbury, was to have preached the morning sermon, but
in consequence of illness, his place was kindly supplied by the Rev. C.
Williams, Independent minister of Salisbury. The afternoon and evening
sermons were preached by the Rev. Messrs. Day, of Wincanton, and Winter,
of Bristol.

The services were interesting and impressive. The pastor of the church
at Shrewton, the Rev. J. Gunning, is about to appeal to the Christian
public to aid his poor but zealous flock in liquidating the debt which
remains on their new place of worship; and it is hoped that he will meet
with kind and liberal encouragement.

       *       *       *       *       *

                           HATHERLEIGH, DEVON.

On Thursday, the 12th of March last, the new Baptist chapel at
Hatherleigh, Devon, was opened for Divine worship. In the morning,
brother Veysey, of Torrington, read and prayed; and brother Nicholson,
of Plymouth, preached from Matt. xiii. 33; and brother Pyne, of
Bideford, closed in prayer. In the afternoon, brother Pyne read and
prayed; and brother May, of Croyde, preached from Acts viii. 5. In the
evening brother Pulsford, of Torrington, read and prayed; and brother
Nicholson preached from John vi. 37, 38, and closed in prayer. Though
the rain was tremendous all the forenoon, yet the place was crowded, and
great numbers were prevented coming by the waters which overflowed the
roads. This is a cause commenced by the Baptist friends of Torrington,
and at present promises to be successful, far beyond the most sanguine
expectations of its warmest friends.

A gallery appears to be much needed already. May the friends of the
Redeemer be ready cheerfully to aid this poor but pious people in this
good and very desirable work! The present erection is 45ft. by 28ft.,
and has cost about L300., of which not more than L50. has been raised.
Here is a fine field for a home missionary. If a holy, active man could
be placed there, there is good ground to expect a most abundant harvest.

       *       *       *       *       *

                             +ORDINATIONS.+

                             CHATHAM, KENT.

On Thursday, February 26th, the Rev. F. Overbury was publicly recognized
as the pastor of the Baptist church meeting in Providence Chapel,
Chatham. The Rev. R. W. Overbury, of London, commenced the service with
reading and prayer. The Rev. T. Price, of Devonshire Square, delivered
the introductory discourse, asked the usual questions, and received Mr.
Overbury's confession of faith. The Rev. W. G. Lewis, of Chatham,
offered the ordination prayer. The Rev. W. H. Murch, president of
Stepney College, gave the charge, from Col. i. 7; and the Rev. J. Smith,
of London, preached to the people, from Phil. i. 27. The Rev. P.
Thompson, A.M. (Indep.), concluded the interesting service with prayer.

       *       *       *       *       *

                        ARTILLERY-STREET, LONDON.

On Wednesday, May 20, the Rev. C. Bathurst Woodman was publicly
recognized as the pastor of the church assembling in Artillery-street,
Bishopsgate without. The Rev. J. B. Shenston commenced the service by
reading the Scriptures and prayer; Rev. N. M. Harry, of Broad-street,
delivered the introductory discourse; the Rev. J. Belcher asked the
usual questions; the Rev. A. Tidman, of Barbican, offered the
designation prayer; and the Rev. J. E. Giles, of Salters' Hall,
delivered the charge to the minister.

On the following evening, the Rev. T. Price, of Devonshire Square,
preached to the people; the Rev. Messrs. Murch, president of Stepney
College, Davies, of Aldermanbury, Peacock, of Spencer Place, &c.,
conducted the other parts of the service. The interest of the meeting on
Wednesday was greatly increased by the presence of the venerable Isaiah
Birt, who, though too ill to officiate, attended for the purpose of
expressing his deep and affectionate interest in the welfare of his
young friend, Mr. Woodman, and of the church assembling in
Artillery-street chapel.

       *       *       *       *       *

                        EVESHAM, WORCESTERSHIRE.

The Rev. J. Blakeman, late of Crayford, has accepted the unanimous
invitation of the Second Baptist Church, Evesham, Worcestershire (late
Rev. C. Room, removed to New Park Street, London), and entered on his
stated pastoral labours the first Sabbath in April last.

       *       *       *       *       *

                         DEPUTATION TO AMERICA.

The Secretaries of the Baptist Union have received a letter from Dr. Cox
and Mr. Hoby, dated New York, April 15. We are happy to learn that our
esteemed brethen reached the shores of America the preceding day in
safety, and were then preparing to enter upon their arduous duty.

       *       *       *       *       *

                               +NOTICES.+

The first Meeting of the East Kent Particular Baptist Association will
be held (Providence permitting) at Dover, on Tuesday and Wednesday, June
the 9th and 10th. The brethren, T. Cramp, of St. Peter's, and Steadman,
of Ramsgate, to preach. On Wednesday evening a public meeting will be
held, in order to form an Auxiliary Baptist Misssionary Society for
East Kent and its neighbourhood. The Rev. Eustace Carey is expected to
be present.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Annual Meeting of the Lancashire and Yorkshire Association of
Baptist churches will be held on Tuesday and Wednesday in Whitsun week,
in George-street chapel, Manchester. Brethren Godwin, Steadman, of
Bradford, and Stephens, are to preach. In case of failure, brethren
Acworth, of Leeds, Harbottle, of Accrington, and Larom.

Accommodation will be provided for such friends as may come from a
distance.

       *       *       *       *       *

The annual meeting of the Bristol Education Society will take place on
Thursday, the 11th of June instant, at the vestry of Broadmead meeting,
Bristol. The sermon will be preached by the Rev. James Acworth, of
Leeds, at Broadmead meeting, at eleven o'clock in the forenoon.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Annual Meeting of the =Baptist Union= will be held at New Park Street
chapel, on Wednesday morning, June 17. Breakfast at six o'clock. The
chair to be taken precisely at seven.

A preparatory meeting of the ministers and representatives will be held
at Salters' Hall chapel, on Monday, June 15th, precisely at five o'clock
in the afternoon; when it is earnestly hoped the brethren, especially
those from the country, will attend.

       *       *       *       *       *

The annual sermon for the Baptist Building Fund will be preached by the
Rev. J. J. Davies, of Tottenham, on Sunday evening, June 14th, at Maze
Pond chapel. Service to commence at half-past six.

The annual meeting will be held on Monday evening, June 22nd, at
Eagle-street chapel, Red Lion Square; the chair to be taken by Joseph
Fletcher, Esq., at half-past six.


                             RECENT DEATHS.

                          MRS. MARY MIDDLETON.

Died, on the 16th of April, in the eighty-fifth year of her age, Mary,
relict of the Rev. J. D. Middleton, the first pastor of the Baptist
church, Lewes, Sussex. For upwards of fifty years she honourably
sustained the Christian character, and "came to her grave in a full age,
like as a shock of corn cometh in in his season."

       *       *       *       *       *

                           MR. NICHOLAS MEHL.

Died, on May 2nd, 1835, Mr. Nicholas Mehl, of Chiswick, a deacon of the
Baptist church at Hammersmith, in his 82nd year. He was a native of
Strasburg, in Germany, and left that country for England at the age of
19; was baptized by the Rev. J. Uppadine in the year 1806. He was one of
the warmest friends to the Baptist cause at Hammersmith, and his
unassuming simplicity of manners, purity of conduct, and marked
benevolence of character, made him beloved by all who knew him. It may,
with truth, be said, he devoted his time to the cause of God, paid much
attention to the poor, and in promoting their comfort seemed to find his
own happiness. May his aged widow, and the church with whom he has been
so long connected, trace his footsteps, and follow him as far as he
followed Christ. His remains were deposited in the vault beneath the
school-room, attached to the Baptist meeting-house, on Thursday, the 7th
of May, there to repose until the resurrection morn. The Rev. J.
Uppadine improved his removal the following Sabbath morning, from Rev.
vii. 14, to the end.

       *       *       *       *       *

                        THE REV. SAMUEL SAUNDERS.

On Tuesday morning, May 19, at half-past one o'clock, died, suddenly, of
a fit of apoplexy, in the 56th year of his age, the Rev. Samuel
Saunders, for nine years pastor of the Baptist church assembling in
Byrom-street, Liverpool. By this sudden and painful stroke the church is
clad in mourning, and a deep and solemn impression is made in the town
at large. A memoir of the deceased may soon be expected.


                            NEW PUBLICATIONS.

                            _Just Published._

The Just Cause; or, the Claims of the Dissenters Expounded, and their
Conduct Vindicated.

An Appeal to the Legislature and the Nation, upon the unconstitutional
Character and irreligious Tendency of an Ecclesiastical Establishment,
united with the Civil Government. By A. Z.

Strict Communion Vindicated. An Answer to the Question, "Why are you a
Strict Baptist?" By John Bane, minister of the Gospel, Aylsham.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Errata.=--In our last number, at page 185, for "tracts" of Elias Hicks,
read "tenets." And in p. 186, after "bold," read "that of" the
Apologist.




                            IRISH CHRONICLE.

                               JUNE, 1835.


An esteemed correspondent, in forwarding recently a valuable
contribution to the funds of the Baptist Irish Society, most justly
remarks, "The Society has walked, perhaps more than any other, 'by
faith, and not by sight.'" And, perhaps, whatever difficulties may have
attended its walk, no society has received greater encouragement calmly
to pursue "the even tenor of its way," or to "walk by the same rule,"
and to "mind the same thing." At the same time, it may not be improper
to remind the considerate and generous benefactors of the institution,
that "the administration of this service not only supplieth the wants of
the saints, but is abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God."

It is intended, Providence permitting, to hold the approaching Annual
Meeting of the Society at the City of London Tavern, Bishopsgate Street,
on Friday morning, the 19th instant. Breakfast at six o'clock, and the
chair to be taken at seven precisely. It is expected that the Rev.
William Thomas, of Limerick, one of the society's earliest agents, will
be present, and communicate to the meeting much interesting
intelligence.

On the previous Monday, the 15th instant, the claims of the society will
be advocated, at the Rev. J. E. Giles's chapel, Salters' Hall, by the
Rev. E. Steane, of Camberwell, who has kindly consented to preach the
Annual Sermon. Service to commence at half-past six in the evening.

       *       *       *       *       *

                          _To the_ =Secretary=.

                                           _Limerick, April 18th, 1835._

   My dear Sir,

Having only returned to this from various places where I have been
visiting the schools and preaching as usual, and must go off in the
morning to preach at Castle Connell and O'Briens bridge, and trying to
grasp every thing, I have only time to write a few lines, and with them
send the readers' journals, as they must go off by the next post, to be
in time. I was much delighted with the Bristol and Keppel Street
Schools, which I have just seen, though in different directions. I trust
I was very useful at Ballycar, where a young lady, twenty years and two
months old, was called in a few hours into eternity, the niece of Major
Colpoys, and daughter of Alderman Abbott of Dublin; she died in the
Lord, and left several unquestionable testimonies.

    Purged in the flood which flowed from Jesu's side,
    She lived a Christian, and a Christian died.

I attended her funeral, and gave several lectures at Ballycar, which I
trust tended to instruct and comfort: several were much affected. I
wrote since a letter, which I hope may be accompanied with a blessing to
her amiable family in Dublin.

I have been since my return preaching at Castle Connell and at
Cloughjordan, and have been this week to Maththeal, to try to get a
place of our own in that town for preaching; it is much wanted, and it
is the next town (though poor and yet populous) in consequence to
Limerick in the county. Good Mr. Finch took me in his gig from Finchly,
there and back; I lectured there, and he gave me L3. for the Society,
and promised me another pound. He and his truly pious and worthy lady
treated me with great kindness.

                                                        Your's, &c.
                                                            =W. Thomas.=

       *       *       *       *       *

                          _To the_ =Secretary=.

                                            _Coolany, April 20th, 1835._

  Dear Brother,

Notwithstanding all the opposition that is made to some of our schools
in this district, still there is every reason to believe that this
opposition is useless, and, instead of the enemy accomplishing what he
desires, it will by the blessing of God have a direct tendency to
further the object it wishes to suppress, and strengthen the cause it
aims to destroy. It appears to me that ignorance is already so far
removed from the bulk of the peasantry, that every attempt to keep them
from seeking instruction will prove a failure. It is evident to every
one that makes a little observation, education is removing ignorance;
and every attempt to stop its advancing progress will prove abortive,
and from whatever persons it may proceed, will expose them to infamy and
shame. However numerous may be our opposers, so long as we are pursuing
the welfare of man in accordance with the principles of divine truth,
whatever difficulties we may have to contend with, we need not be held
in suspense with regard to the issue. May it be our concern to pursue
our course in the spirit of Christians, then our feeble exertions will
have the approbation and blessing of God! "And who is he that will harm
you if ye be followers of that which is good?"

With this you will also receive the journals of the inspectors and
sabbath readers. I hope that the Lord is blessing their labours in
leading sinners to the knowledge of the truth, in promoting the
doctrines of the gospel, and the advancement of his own glory. Many of
the people are beginning to feel anxious to read the Scriptures for
themselves, and to feel the importance of taking them as their only
guide; and, whilst there are some that implicitly lean to the authority
of the priest, there are others who reject the traditions of men, and
claim the indisputable right of judging for themselves in matters that
relate to the salvation of the soul, and the glory of God.

During the present month, besides supplying at Ballina on the Sabbath
during Mr. Allen's absence, I have visited several places in the
country, and hope to visit them as often as I possibly can. The
preaching of the gospel, accompanied by the blessing of God, like the
waters of a mighty river, bears down all before it; and Jehovah has
promised that it shall rise and expand, like the waters of the deluge,
until it cover the whole earth, and universally prevail. A few Roman
Catholics have attended preaching since I came to reside in this
village. May the Lord give me wisdom and understanding that I may be
wise to win souls to Christ, and more grace that I may be more devoted
to his service!

                                                        Your's &c.
                                                             =J. Bates.=

       *       *       *       *       *

                        _To the_ Rev. =J. Bates=.

                                                 _Easky, Mar. 30, 1835._

Since my last letter I travelled through parts of the counties of Latrun
and Sligo, earnestly endeavouring as usual, by reading, conversation,
and expounding the Scriptures, to promote the design of our Institution
among my friends and acquaintances.

Within one mile of Dromahare, I entered the house of an old woman of
ninety-eight years, with whom I had often-times before conversed, on the
doctrine of justification by faith; when she understood I had arrived,
she sent for me, stretched out her hand, and said she was happy to see
me before death would call her away. I told her I was sorry to see her
so low, but as it was the will of the Lord, we ought to be resigned to
his will. I asked her what her dependance was? Her reply was, In Jesus
Christ alone, and that she had derived great comfort from reading some
tracts I had left her, the last time I was with her; I said to her,
"Have you never done any thing to please God?" "O no, Sir, I was too
long of that opinion, and through hearing you, and reading the parts of
the Scriptures you pointed out to me, I am persuaded that all the power
and the glory is the Lord's." I was rejoiced to find so great a change
in this poor woman, and endeavoured to point out to her the Lamb of God,
who taketh away the sins of the world. I read several chapters of the
word of God, and prayed with her. I conversed and read with many
Protestants and Roman Catholics during my journey, as well as in the
neighbourhood in which I live; many of them will pay great attention,
while others think they are not safe to hear me read the Scriptures.

                                                             =F. Irwin.=

       *       *       *       *       *

                       _To the_ Rev. =W. Thomas=.

                                             _Ballycar, April 13, 1835._

I forward you an account of my labours, during the past month. March
17th. In Crussagh, I read Matt. xxv. to four persons, pointing out to
them, from the parable of the ten virgins, the absolute necessity of
watchfulness, and of being prepared to meet our Lord when he doth come.
March 22nd. In Newmarket, I read 2 Cor. v. to two persons, pointing out
to them the full assurance which the apostle Paul had of the immediate
happiness, in eternal felicity, after death, when he could say, "We
know that, if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we
have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens." One of these persons said he could not be convinced that any
poor sinner could be good enough to enter heaven, or appear in the
presence of God, without being cleansed from his sins in purgatory. As
to goodness, our Lord declares, "after all we have done, we are
unprofitable servants." And he says of the unprofitable servant, "Take
and bind him, hand and foot, and cast ye the unprofitable servant into
outer darkness, where there shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing
of teeth." Again, we read in Eph. ii. 8. "By grace are ye saved, through
faith, and that not of ourselves, it is the gift of God; not of works,
lest any man should boast." Again in Titus iii. 5, "Not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved
us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost."
After reading different passages of Scripture to these persons, proving
that "the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God eternal life
through Jesus Christ," I endeavoured to convince them, from different
passages of Scripture, that Christ, after having purged our sins, sat
down at the right hand of the Majesty on high. March 28th. In Drumline,
I read John v. endeavouring to impress on the minds of three persons the
necessity of reading the Scriptures, and of obeying that direct command
of our Lord's, who says, "Search the Scriptures." One of these persons
replied, that the Scriptures ought to be read by every person, and he
was convinced any person preventing others from reading them, had a
great deal to answer for. April 2nd. I read to two persons Matt. vi.
pointing out to them the crime of persons who repeat the Lord's prayer,
who have the smallest enmity to others, showing them they were not
calling upon God to forgive them, but they were calling upon him to
condemn them, as long as such a spirit of hatred existed in their minds.
These persons never seemed to have considered this before, and seemed
much alarmed at the idea of it. April 5. In Quin, I read Luke xi. to
five persons, pointing out to them the great inducement which our Lord
gives to prayer, when he says, "If a son ask bread of any of you that is
a father, will he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he for a
fish give him a serpent? If ye then, being evil, know how to give good
gifts unto your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give
the Holy Spirit to them that ask him!" April 10. In Granahan, I read
Acts v. to four persons, pointing out to them the dreadful visitation of
God's judgment on Ananias and Sapphira, in consequence of a lie, showing
them from different portions of Scripture, that liars are set down with
murderers.

                                                         =Samuel Cross.=

       *       *       *       *       *

                          _To_ =Rev. J. Allen=.

                                              _Ballina, April 18, 1835._

   Dear Sir,

It is now about twelve months since I entered on the active duties of my
station at Easky. On beholding opposition directed against the cause of
Christ from various quarters, and conscious of my own weakness, I
commenced my labours with a trembling heart. In humble dependence on Him
who can do infinitely more than short-sighted mortals can comprehend, I
entered the field, and, the Lord's name be praised, experienced that
"the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong;" and though
"there are many devices in man's heart, nevertheless, the counsel of the
Lord shall stand." In the commencement, Roman Catholics and nominal
Protestants were unwilling to come under the preaching of the gospel;
but at present Roman Catholics, as well as Protestants, are regular in
their attendance at preaching; and the spirit of inquiry, that prevails
among both parties, exceeds any thing that I have hitherto witnessed.
May not the friends of Christ hail with rapture the approach of that
period, when their exertions on behalf of Ireland will be rewarded, and
their hopes realized? Yes: there is at present much cause of
thankfulness, that their labours have been already abundantly owned, and
the word of the Lord is gone forth, and is daily prospering in the
things whereunto it was sent.

During the spring, as the people can come a longer distance, the
congregations, on the Sabbath-days, are larger than in winter, but on
the week-days not so well attended in the villages, as the people are
employed in the fields. However, I endeavour to meet them at their work,
for the purpose of speaking to them about the salvation of their souls;
and on these occasions I find the Irish language very useful, as the
most inveterate opposers of religion, when addressed in their own
tongue, are ready to hearken with attention. The conversations that
occur from time to time are often very interesting.

                                                          =M. Mullarky.=


                             CONTRIBUTIONS.

                      Received by the Treasurer:--

                                                               L  s. d.
  R. G., per W. L. Smith, Esq.                                 1  1  0
  Legacy of the late Mrs. Bailey, of Brixton                 200  0  0
  T. Stephens, Esq., Ramsgate                                  1  0  0
  Mrs. John Gale, Bedford                                      0 10  0
  Mrs. Gamby,  ditto                                           0 10  0

                     Received by the Rev. J. Dyer:--

  Rev. J. B. Burt (Beaulieu) and friends                       2  0  0
  Sylvanus Fox, Esq., Wellington                               0 10  0
  Hetton, by Mrs. Greatrex                                     1 10  0
  Manchester, York Street Sunday School, by Mrs. Giles.        2  2  0
  Plymouth, by Rev. S. Nicholson                               3  1  0
  John Baylis, Esq., Ponders' End.                            10  0  0
  Rev. J. Stuart, Sawbridgeworth                               1  1  0
  Bewdley, Friends, by Rev. G. Brookes                         1 15  9
  Edinburgh, Friends, by Rev. W. Innes                         4  0  0
  Edinburgh, Friend, by Miss Haldane                           1  0  0
  Rev. Reynold Hogg, Kimbolton                                 2  2  0

                           By the Secretary:--

  A Friend to the Baptist Irish Society,
    by the Rev. C. Elven, of Bury                            100  0  0
  W. Paxon, Esq., ann. subs.                                   1  1  0
  W. B. W.                                                     5  0  0
  C. Robson, Berwick                                           5  0  0
  The Baptist Congregational Missionary  Society, Berwick      5  0  0

                   Collected by the Rev. S. Davis,--

  At Cheltenham, additional                                    2  2  6
    Worcester, Mrs. Page                                       5  0  0
    Birmingham                                                34  5 10
    Liverpool                                                100  4  8
    Bradford (Yorkshire)                                       3  0  0
    Rochdale                                                   8  5  0
    Manchester                                                33  9  0
    Bolton                                                     4  0  0
    Warrington                                                 8 14  7

       *       *       *       *       *

Subscriptions received by S. Marshall, Esq., 181, High Holborn; Mr. P.
Millard, Bishopsgate Street; Messrs. Burls, 56, Lothbury; Rev. G.
Pritchard, 4, York Place, Pentonville, gratuitous Secretary; by Messrs.
Ladbrokes and Co., Bankers, Bank Buildings; by Mr. H. D. Dickie, 13,
Bank Street, and Rev. Mr. Innes, Frederick Street, Edinburgh; and P.
Brown, Esq., Cardigan.

          LONDON: J. HADDON, PRINTER, CASTLE STREET, FINSBURY.




                           MISSIONARY HERALD.
  CXCVIII.                    JUNE, 1835.


                            BAPTIST MISSION.

The Friends to this Mission are respectfully informed, that the
following arrangements have been made for the =Annual Meetings of the
Society=:--

                           TUESDAY, JUNE 16.

=Morning, xi.=--The Committee of the Society will assemble at the Mission
House, Fen Court, when the company of all ministers of the Denomination,
who may be in town, is requested.

                           WEDNESDAY, JUNE 17.

=Morning, xi.=--Sermon at the Poultry Chapel (Rev. J. Clayton's), by the
Rev. =Samuel Summers=, of Bristol.

=Evening, vi.=--Sermon at Surrey Chapel, Blackfriars Road, by the Rev.
=Benjamin Godwin=, of Bradford, Yorkshire.

                           THURSDAY, JUNE 18.

=Morning, IX.=--Meeting for prayer, at Eagle Street Meeting House. Some
Minister from the country is expected to deliver an Address.

=XI.=--Annual Meeting of the Society, at Finsbury Chapel, =T. F. Buxton=,
Esq., M.P., in the Chair.


                          FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE.

                                COLOMBO.

We have much pleasure in communicating the following intelligence from
this important station. The baptism of twenty-four native converts in
less than a year, and the formation of another church composed of those
who were lately heathens, are circumstances of great interest, and must
be very encouraging to our worthy brother, who has been labouring so
diligently among them.

    At nearly the conclusion of another year, I am reminded of my
    obligations to write to you. On surveying the events which have
    occurred in it, we have reason to sing both of mercy and judgment to
    our heavenly Father. While much affliction has reigned around us, I
    have to bless God for the continuation of my own life and health to
    labour for Him. Each of the members of my own family have had to
    endure a large degree of sickness and debility; yet it has not come
    near to myself, except as the enervating nature of a tropical clime
    has produced a considerable degree of lassitude, connected with the
    labours of a Missionary life. Nor do I recollect that, during the
    year I have been obliged to suspend any public exercise through
    personal indisposition. This continuance of health has been rendered
    more valuable in consequence of the repeated illness of my
    colleague, brother Siers, who has been many times laid aside from
    his work, so that I have been obliged in many instances, as far as I
    could consistently with my stated engagements, to take what devolves
    on him. As he is chiefly occupied in labouring among the Portuguese,
    I have been under the necessity of cultivating an acquaintance with
    their language, and have now acquired a sufficiency of it to preach
    in it the glorious Gospel of the blessed God.

    In the commencement of the year, things wore a distressing
    appearance, and we went forward with our work under many
    discouragements. But in the progress of the year I do not know of
    any part of the time since I have been here, in which a greater
    degree of the Divine blessing appears to have rested on my labours,
    as far as the native population is concerned. Twenty-three
    Singalese, and one Tamil man, after subjecting them to a
    considerable trial, and private as well as public instruction, have
    been baptized and added to the church, and they appear to continue
    to walk according to the vows they have made. Sixteen of these live
    contiguous to the village called Byamvillee, which I either supply
    myself or some of our friends, every Sabbath-day; so that we have
    now a little church in that village of twenty-eight members, to whom
    the word of God is regularly preached, and the ordinances of His
    house duly administered. By the aid, too, of some of the members of
    our Singalese church, we have been enabled, on a Sabbath-day, to
    carry on a village itinerancy to a greater extent than before. So
    that, in addition to the Singalese, Portuguese, and English
    services, which are conducted in our regular places of worship in
    the Grand Pass, Pettah, in the Fort, and Hanwella, we have seven
    places around Colombo, or in the environs of it, where there is
    Singalese preaching, either every Sabbath or every other
    Sabbath-day. These are independent of many places to which, on week
    days, we go to make known the name of the Saviour.

    In consequence of the recent removals of the 61st and 97th regiments
    from Colombo to other parts of the island, our English church has
    been almost entirely scattered; but a small number are now again
    collected, who have been regularly organized into a Christian
    society. Our schools, which at the commencement of the year were
    much diminished by the alarming prevalence of the small-pox, have
    again recovered to in general their former size; especially the
    female school in our own yard, conducted by my own family, which now
    numbers more than fifty scholars, who have made very rapid progress
    in reading and in needlework. I fear unless we can obtain further
    assistance in this school, it must for a time be renounced, as my
    eldest daughter appears, by a continued pain in her side, to labour
    under a liver complaint, which renders a relaxation of her labours
    indispensably necessary, even if a removal to a colder clime be not
    requisite to save her life. Our schools, with the exception of one,
    which, on account of local circumstances, has for a time been lately
    discontinued, are the same in number as at the conclusion of the
    last year--and the number of attendants nearly the same.

    The inhabitants of this part of the island have been much afflicted
    lately by a dreadful flood, which no one living ever recollects to
    have been equalled. It came on suddenly and unexpectedly, at
    mid-night, like the judgment day. By it multitudes were roused from
    their slumbers, and obliged to fly for their lives. Many were killed
    by it; the houses of others destroyed--and being near the approach
    of harvest, the injury done to the rice and other crops is
    incalculable. Many of our members have suffered severely from it, in
    the loss of their little property, in the destruction of their
    houses, and in the bodily privations they have endured. I went on
    Wednesday last to preach at a village where one of our members
    lives, and the account he gave me of the perilous condition in which
    he and his family were, was most heart-rending. The water rose as
    high as the shoulders of a tall man in his house. His dwelling was
    washed away. He and his son were obliged to ascend to the outside of
    the roof of a bungalow, where they remained two days without food;
    if they called no one could hear them, they could get near no one,
    nor any one near to them. There, amidst the pelting of the rain--the
    howling of the wind--the creaking of the trees--and the fear of the
    place on which they were sitting falling, they were obliged to
    continue. The government, with the most commendable diligence, sent
    boats laden with rice and dried fish, as far as they were able; and
    a subscription has been opened to afford relief to the sufferers,
    which has been liberally supported. I engaged persons, whom I
    supplied with money, to go among the most needy in and near to
    Colombo, and give them food to prevent their dying with hunger. Our
    meeting-house at Hanwella has been entirely destroyed by the
    inundation; and, in the present state of things there, I do not
    think it expedient to build it again. A small bungalow will be
    erected for the accommodation of those who wish to hear the word of
    God; and I hope to obtain a sufficient quantity of timber from the
    wreck to erect a little place of worship at Byamvillee, if I can
    obtain sufficient subscriptions for it.

    I have now my hands completely full in preparing an answer to a
    Catholic priest's reply to a tract I published on saint and image
    worship. I believe I mentioned the original tract, entitled, "St.
    Antonio," in my last, which has excited no small stir among the
    papists in this place. An abusive and crafty reply has been
    circulated by them, to which the Tract Society here has deemed a
    rejoinder requisite. As I was the person who began the assault, the
    burden of preparing it has fallen on me. The drift of the answer
    will be to disprove the authority of tradition--to destroy the
    claims of the Roman Catholic church--and show the vanity of the
    arguments by which they endeavour to support their soul-destroying
    idolatry. It will occupy, as far as I can judge, about 250 pages,
    and is now nearly ready for press. Indeed the first sheet is gone to
    it; but as the Wesleyan press works very slowly, and they have two
    or three other works in hand, it may be some time before it makes
    its appearance. O that it may be the means of leading some of the
    multitudes of the deluded people by whom we are surrounded, to
    consult the Bible for themselves!

       *       *       *       *       *

                                SEEBPORE.

We are thankful to report that our friends Mr. and Mrs. Penney, and
their companions, arrived in safety at Calcutta, about the end of
September. Two months afterwards, as our readers will perceive by the
following letter, Mr. and Mrs. George Pearce rejoined their missionary
associates, with health mercifully recruited by their voyage.

    By the good providence of God my dear partner and I arrived once
    more in Calcutta, in safety, about the end of November last, after a
    speedy and pleasant passage to the shores of India, of three months
    and twenty days. The voyage proved very beneficial to the health of
    us both, but particularly so to Mrs. Pearce, who landed here much
    stronger than she was when she left Bristol. We had the happiness of
    finding all our immediate associates well; and that Mr. Penney, with
    his companions (with the exception of Mrs. Anderson, of whose
    lamented decease you have long ere this been apprised), had arrived
    in safety. I mentioned in my letter to you from Madeira, that the
    Captain of the St. George had requested me to conduct divine service
    on the Lord's-day. This I continued to do till the close of the
    voyage, and I had the happiness to witness the regular attendance of
    most of the passengers, as well as the ship's company. We have to
    speak in the best terms of the treatment we received from the
    Captain and officers of the ship, and also from the passengers.

    I should have written to you before this, but I was anxious to
    inform you at the same time of the station we are to occupy in
    future. That point is now settled, and Seebpore, the place I
    mentioned to the Committee when in England, is to be the place of my
    future labours. Here I have already obtained a house, situated on
    the bank of the river, about a mile and a half below brother
    Thomas's, at Howrah, and am now residing in it. The spot will prove,
    I hope, a very eligible one for native work, as we are in the midst
    of a very dense and respectable Hindoo population, with ready access
    to numerous villages a few miles in the interior. With the exception
    of one or two schools for teaching Bengalee, under the patronage of
    the Bishop's College, there is nothing being done here, for the
    instruction of the heathen in the knowledge of Christ; and I believe
    of late years, nothing has been done. As far as I know of Calcutta
    and its suburbs, there is no spot that I am aware of, that needs
    missionary efforts more than Seebpore, and none more eligible. May
    the blessing of God attend the efforts now about to be made for
    their spiritual benefit!

    The brethren have requested me also to resume charge of the
    Luckyantipore station, and to take the oversight of Kharee also, as
    brother W. H. Pearce is desirous of relinquishing it, in consequence
    of his increasing work in Calcutta. This I have consented to do, not
    however without being in some measure sensible of the arduous nature
    of the work now devolving on me; especially as the number of people
    at the stations have considerably increased, and are greatly
    increasing. I would, however, humbly look to Him who giveth strength
    according to our day. This department of my work will occasion my
    leaving home for days together several times in the year. The
    brethren have also considered it proper to divide the Christian
    Boarding School; and as Mrs. Ellis was desirous of some relief,
    owing to the increase of the schools, her weaker state of health,
    and the increasing cares of her family, Mrs. Pearce has been
    requested to take charge of the girls' department; which she has
    consented to do; and in the course of a few days expects to enter
    again on this interesting sphere of labour. I have little more to
    add, excepting just to mention that, about ten days after my
    arrival, I accompanied brother W. H. Pearce on a journey to
    Luckyantipore, where we had the pleasure of baptizing eight natives.
    A full account of this interesting journey you may soon expect.

Under date of the 9th of December, Mr. Anderson remarks:--

    Since I have no interesting intelligence to communicate respecting
    my own labours in this country, perhaps I may be privileged to speak
    of the good that has apparently resulted from the labour of others.
    And here I would refer to the native church, over which W. H. Pearce
    presides as the pastor; it is impossible to contemplate but with
    feelings of interest and gratitude, upwards of sixty of your
    fellow-creatures, who were once in the darkness of heathenism, now
    uniting in rendering worship to the true God. There is an appearance
    too in many of them, that would indicate that they live very near to
    God--that they are none other than the meek and penitent followers
    of the Lamb. I would not forget to mention the schools at Chitpore,
    under the care and superintendence of my esteemed friend the Rev. J.
    Ellis; they speak highly of the diligence and devotedness of the
    labours both of himself and of his dear partner in life. Having been
    requested to examine them in history, geography, and the Scriptures,
    I complied, and the result was most satisfactory, and beyond all
    expectation. I would that I could say any thing to stir up the minds
    of the friends at home on behalf of these valuable institutions. In
    addition to the five youths, who have publicly professed their faith
    in Christ by baptism, and who afford unequivocal proof of a change
    of heart, there are two others, who will speedily follow their
    example. We bless God for these fruits, which we hope are but the
    earnest of a future glorious harvest.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                 DIGAH.

We learn, by a letter from Mr. Lawrence, dated the 22nd of November,
that he was about to remove from this station to Allahabad. At that
large and populous city, which, it is expected, will be the seat of the
new presidency, he will be joined by Mr. Anderson, and both will labour
in conjunction for the benefit of the native population of Allahabad and
its neighbourhood. The reasons for taking this step have been explained
at length to the Committee, who concur in the arrangement, and trust it
will promote, in an increased degree, the great object in view.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                JAMAICA.

The tenor of recent letters from this island is, on the whole, highly
satisfactory. Our brethren on the north side are actively engaged in
rebuilding their chapels. Mr. Knibb writes from Falmouth, under date of
the 20th of February:--

    My church is, I hope, in a prosperous state; most of the backsliders
    have returned with weeping and supplication, while the inquirers are
    pressing forward to the kingdom of God. Since my return rather more
    than 200 have been baptized; their experiences have delighted me; I
    do believe that the Lord has been with them of a truth: full 1000
    are now waiting for examination. I shall proceed slowly and
    prayerfully with them, and I hope shall receive assistance from
    above. Most of those who have been baptized were praying for five
    years, during which time, their conduct, as far as we are able to
    discover, has been consistent. My plan is this, I examine each one
    privately, Mrs. K. talking with the females. The deacons are
    appointed to examine into their conduct, and I get them to talk with
    them. I then call a church-meeting, read over the names of those
    whom I have examined, and of whom I think favourably, and request
    any member present to mention any thing they know against any one.
    If nothing is said, I receive them for baptism. I speak as plainly
    as I can, and I feel that, if they are deceived, I am clear of their
    blood.

    On February the 14th, the corner-stone of the new chapel was laid,
    and a glorious day it was. Being Saturday, the country friends could
    be with us, and they came from various distances of ten to fifteen
    and twenty miles round. About half-past three the service commenced.
    We had erected half our useful tent, and had provided a temporary
    platform under it. Brother Hutchins commenced by giving out the
    102nd Psalm:

      Let Zion and her sons rejoice,
        Behold the promised hour;
      Her God hath heard her mourning voice,
        And comes t' exalt his power.

    Brother Burchell read several short and very appropriate portions of
    the word of God, and engaged in prayer. Brother Tinson gave a short
    address; when he and brother Dendy, with myself, proceeded to lay
    the stone, which had previously been prepared, and a cavity made, in
    which was placed a bottle containing a short account of the
    formation and the history of the church and the laying of the stone,
    with the coins of his present Majesty in it. After reading aloud the
    inscription, I placed the _medal_ struck in commemoration of the
    abolition of Slavery, presented to me on the 7th of August at the
    City of London Tavern. When this part of the ceremony was completed,
    which excited intense interest, brother Dendy gave a most
    appropriate address for about fifteen minutes, and we sang,

      Now let the slumbering church awake,
        And shine in bright array;
      Thy chains, O captive daughter, break,
        And cast thy bonds away.

    The collection was then made, which amounted, with the one on Lord's
    day for the same object, to L104. 10s., of our money. I then
    addressed the multitude assembled, urged upon those who were
    emancipated an attention to their duties, and having, as I thought,
    a fit opportunity, as two or three magistrates were present, assured
    them that I was still the foe of slavery, and the friend of the
    oppressed; and that, while they acted right, I would defend them,
    let the consequences to myself be what they might. Another hymn
    being sung, brother Dexter concluded in prayer. Though nearly 3000
    persons were crowded together, the utmost order prevailed, while to
    me it was truly a happy day.

    On the Sabbath-morning (the fifth anniversary of my recognition as
    their pastor), the ordinance of baptism was administered to
    seventy-two persons. The place selected was the sea, at the point of
    a beautiful cove; full 2500 persons were assembled, no unseemly
    noise was made, or gazing curiosity manifested. We commenced by
    singing and prayer. Brother Burchell administered the ordinance; it
    was one of the most solemn seasons I ever had the pleasure to
    witness. On returning home numerous were the greetings we received
    from our happy friends; the narrow road was lined for nearly half a
    mile with them--truly it was a scene I longed that you should
    behold. Brother Burchell preached in the morning; I received the new
    members by the right hand of fellowship in the afternoon, and
    administered the ordinance of the Lord's Supper, which was a solemn
    season, and rendered additionally so by its being the anniversary of
    my pastorate among them; which brought to their and to our minds our
    dear departed brother Mann. At the conclusion I tried to sing the
    hymn we sung at his death, but they wept and sobbed aloud. Oh, they
    did love him, they still love him, and he was every way worthy of
    their love. Brother Tinson preached in the evening; and, rather
    fatigued _in_ but not _of_ the exercises of the day, we closed our
    fifth anniversary.

    The first stroke of the foundation was struck on the 10th of
    February, the anniversary of dear Mann's death; it was not done by
    design, but was purely accidental. The corner-stone was laid on the
    anniversary of my release from prison, being three years from that
    period.


                            HOME PROCEEDINGS.

                       DEPARTURE OF MISSIONARIES.

Mr. and Mrs. Quant embarked for Nassau, in the Little Catharine, Captain
Kopp, on Monday, May 11th; and Mr. and Mrs. Shotton, for Jamaica, in the
Witton Castle, April 28th.

                LIST OF FOREIGN LETTERS LATELY RECEIVED.

  =East Indies= Rev. W. H. Pearce          Calcutta     Dec. 8.
                ---- G. Henderson          Berhampore   Dec. 9.
                ---- G. Pearce             Seebpore     Jan. 7.
                ---- Ebenezer Daniel       Colombo      Dec. 27.

  =West Indies= ---- H. C. Taylor          Old Harbour  March 6.
                ---- J. Clarke             Jericho      March 21.
                ---- W. Knibb              Falmouth     March 17 & 24.
                ---- T. Burchell           Montego Bay  Feb. 23, &
                                                          March 17 & 24.
                ---- F. Gardner            Kingston     March 30.
                ---- B. B. Dexter          Montego Bay  March 16.
                ---- J. Coultart           Sydenham     March 11.
                ---- J. M. Phillippo       Spanish Town March 26.
                ---- Joseph Bourn          Belize       Feb. 7.
                ---- Edward Baylis         Port Maria   Feb. 10 &
                                                          Mar. 13
                ---- Knibb, Abbott,
                       & Dendy             Falmouth     Feb. 7.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Contributions received on account of the Baptist Missionary
    Society, from April 20, 1835, to May 20, 1835, not including
    individual subscriptions._

       _Collected in Scotland by_ Messrs. =Groser= _and_ =Flood=.

  Dunfermline:
    Collection at Baptist Chapel                       5  0  0
    Mr. Dewar                                          2  0  0
                                                      --------  7  0  0

  Capar:
    Collection at Mr. Watson's                         3  0  0
    Collected by Mrs. Sturrock                         3 11  2
    Bible Class                                        0 10  6
    Collected at the Secession Church, Aug. 1,
      (for Negro Education)                            3  0  0
                                                      -------- 10  1  8

  Kirkaldy
    Coll. at the Baptist Church                        8  0  0
    John Fergus, Esq.                                  2  0  0
    David Landale, Esq.                                1  1  0
                                                      -------- 11  1  0

  Anstruther:
    Auxiliary Baptist Society                         1  3  0
    Baptist Church                                     2 15  0
    Collection                                         1  1  6
    Missionary Box                                     0 10  6
                                                      --------  5 10  0

  St. Andrews:
    Collection                                         2  2  6
    Miss  Wilson                                       1  0  0
                                                      --------  3  2  6

  Auchtermuchty:
    Collection at Dr. Taylor's                         1 10  0

  Perth:
    Coll. at Mr. Newland's Church                      5  6  6
    Do. at Mr. Thompson's                              5  8  0
    Do. at the Independent do.                         3  6  1
    Perthshire Bible Society (T)                       3 15  9
                                                      -------- 17 16 4

  Dundee:
    Aux. Society, by Mr. A. Low                       10  0  0
    Baptist Meeting, Seagate                           6  0  0
    Baptist Meeting, Baltic-street                     4  0  0
    Chapel Shade Penny-a-week Society, by Alex. Doeg   2  0  0
    Cards, by Mr. James Low                            0 14  0
    Collection at the Public Meeting at the
      Rev. Dr. Russell's                              13 13  8
                                                      -------- 36  7  8

  Forfar:
    Friends at Kerrimuir                               0  7  6
    Public Meeting                                     1 17  2
                                                      --------  2  4  8

  Brechin:
    Society for Missions, Tracts, &c.                  3  0  0
    Collection at Mr. Blackader's Church W.I.F.        3  9  0
                                                      --------  6  9  0

  Montrose:
    Secession Church                                   7 12  0
    Monthly Prayer-meeting                             1  1  0
    Penny Society, by Mr. Mudie                        5  0  0
    A Thank Offering                                   2  0  0
                                                      -------- 15 13  0
  Arbroath:
    Collection at Mr. Ramsay's                         3  3  6

  Aberdeen:
    Collection at South Silver-st                      6 10  2
    Do. at John-street, including L2. 10s.
      from a Friend                                    6 10  0
    Do. at Mr. Penman's                                2  2  0
    Do. at Mr. Spence's                                2 10  0
    Do. at Mr. Stirling's                              3 13  4
    Do. at Mr. Thompson's, Sermon and Public Meeting   7  7  0
    Donation from Missionary Society in
      Mr. Angus's Congregation                         2  0  0
    From Female Servant Society                        2  2  0
    From Rev. Mr. Biggs' Church, Fraserburgh           3  0  0
    Friends at Fogyloan    W.I.F.                      1  0  0
    Friends, per G. Laing    W.I.F.                    1  0  0
                                                      -------- 37 14 6

  Elgin:
    Coll. at Mr. Pringle's Chapel                      3  0  6
    Baptist Meeting                                    5  0  0
                                                      --------  8  0  6

  Banff:
    Coll. at Mr. Murker's Chapel                       2 16  6
    United Prayer-meeting                              1 10  0
                                                      --------  4  6  6

  Pitgair:
    Friends, by Mr. J. Farrier W.I.F.                  1  0  0

  Mill Seat:
    Collection at Mr. Morison's Chapel                 2  0  0

  Glasgow:
    Coll. at Rev. Dr. Heugh's                         10  0  0
    Rev. Mr. Thompson's, Hutcheson Town                7 18  0
    Public Meeting                                     2  8  2
    Rev. Mr. Paterson's                                5  0  0
    Wesleyan Methodist Chapel                          1 11  6
    Rev. Mr. Anderson's, Relief                        4 19  0
    ---- Mr. Macleod's                                11 14  0
    ---- Dr. Wardlaw's                                 4  2 10
    ---- Dr. Beattie's                                 2 17  0
    ---- Mr. Oris, Female Assoc.                       4  0  0
    Subscriptions, by Mr. Swan                        14  6  9
          Do.         do.  for T.                      2  4  0
          Do.         do.  for S.                      1 19  0
          Do. for _Jamaica School_                     1  1  0
                                                      -------- 74  1  3

  Huntley:
    Collection at Rev. Mr. Hill's                     11  0  0
    Missionary Society                                 3  0  0
    Youth's ditto                                      1  0  0
                                                      -------- 15  0  0

  Paisley:
    East Relief Church, Dr. Thompson's                 9 13  4
    Baptist Church, by Mr. Watson                      3  0  0
    Mrs. Dunn                W.I.F.                    1  0  0
    Collection at Dr. Ferrier's                        2  6  1
    Do. at Independent Church                          2 12  8
                                                      -------- 18 12  1

  Insch:
    Collection at Rev. Mr. Campbell's                  3  3  0

  Greenock:
    Collection at Baptist Chapel                       7  7  6
    Do. Union-st., Secession Church                    3  3  2
    South Parish Church                                2  6  6
                                                      -------- 12 17  2

  Edinburgh:
    Collection at Elder-st. Chapel                    14  6  4
    Do. at the Tabernacle                             14  7  4
    Do. at Mr. Johnston's Chapel, Nicholsons-street    5  0  0
    Do. at Dr. Brown's, Broughton Place               10  0  0
    Do. at Mr. Cleghorn's, North College-street        6  0  0
    Do. at Mr. M'Gilchrist's, Rose-street             11 11  5
    Do. ditto. Public Meeting                          7  6  8
    Do. at Mr. French's, South College-street          2 14  6
    Do. at Mr. Wilkes, Albany-st                       4 15  8
    Do. at the Baptist Church, Pleasance               6  7 10
    Do. at Elder-street Baptist Church
      Missionary Society                               3  3  0
                                                      -------- 91  2  9

                Remitted by Mr. H. D. Dickie, Edinburgh:

    St. Andrews Missionary Society                     4  0  0
      Ditto Second donation                            2  0  0
                                                      --------  6  0  0

  Leith:
    Leith Auxiliary Missionary Society                          5 10  0
    Lochee Society for Propagating Christianity at
      Home and Abroad                                           3  0  0
    Dumfries and Maxwelton Penny-a-week Society                 3  0  0
    Friends in Edinburgh and Leith                             15 11  4
    Ditto          ditto  T                                     0 10  6
    John Turnbull Hawick, Esq., for Chapels                     1  1  0

  Friends in Aberdeen, viz.:
      Dr. J. Walker, Lynturk                           0 10  0
      Mrs. J. Wright, Echt                             0 10  0
    Ditto for Chapels in Jamaica                       0 13  0
                                                      --------  1 13  0

    Collected by James Dick                            0  8  8
                                                             ----------
                                                             L424 11  7

To the above list we subjoin the following note from Mr. Groser to the
Editor:

       My dear Brother,

     When you publish the recent contributions from Scotland, I will
     thank you to acknowledge the kindness which Mr. Flood and myself
     experienced throughout our tour. At Edinburgh, at Glasgow, at
     Dunfermline, at Kirkaldy, at St. Andrews, at Dundee, at Perth, at
     Aberdeen, and at many other places; in short, every where that we
     went, we were received with the greatest cordiality. More pulpits
     were open to us than we had time or strength to occupy, and we were
     compelled to pass unvisited some towns and villages where we had
     reason to believe we should have found a hearty welcome. The thanks
     of the Committee are especially due to the ministers of the
     Seceding, Independent, and Relief denominations, for the readiness
     with which they admitted us to preach and collect in their
     congregations. Among those churches also which are known
     technically as Scotch Baptists, we found much to admire and esteem;
     and nothing but more frequent intercourse with each other appears
     necessary to create between us and many of their ministers, entire
     communion an fraternal confidence.

                                                   I am yours truly,
                                                            =W. Grosef=.


  Boxmoor, Friends, by Miss Church, (Sunday-school L1)          5 15  0

  Reading, Auxiliary Society, on account, by Mr. Williams      38  0  0

  Miss Cadby's Missionary Box                                   1  5  5

  Oakingham, collection and subscriptions, by Rev. J. Coles    21  7  2

  Otley, (Suffolk), by Rev. J. Sprigg                           1 15  7

  Hitchin, Missionary Association, by Miss Palmer              17 17  0

  Poole, subscriptions, by Rev. S. Bulgin                       2  1  0

  Coate and Bampton, by Mr. Huckvale, (for Jamaica)             4  0  0

  Ridgmount, Friends, by Miss Cuttriss                          1 18  6

  Great Shelford, subscriptions, by Miss Nutter                 6  0  0

  Suffolk, Society in Aid of Missions, by Shepherd Ray, Esq.   25  7  6

  Bewdley, collection, &c., by Rev. G. Brookes                  3  0  0

  Missionary Box at Mr. Day's, Commercial-road                  1  6  6

  Exeter, balance of contributions, by Mr. Commins             44 17  7

  Harlow, small subscriptions, by Miss Barnard                  3 16  6

  Hemel Hempsted, collection, &c., by Mr. Ford                 21 12  2

  Bath, subscriptions, by Rev. O. Clarke                        8  1  0

  Sway, contributions, by Rev. W. Mursell                       6  0  0

  St. Alban's, collection and subscriptions, by Rev. W. Upton  31  6  9

  Harpenden,         do.                        do.             3 18  6

  Kent, Auxiliary Society, on account, by Rev. W. Groser       25  0  0

  Dunstable, collection and subscriptions, by
    Mr. Gutteridge, jun.                                       50  3  6

  Lymington, &c., by Rev. J  Millard                           12  0  0

  Canterbury, Subscriptions by Mr. Christian        8 12 10
    Collected by Miss Philpot and Mrs. West        19  5  0
                                                   --------    27 17 10

                                DONATIONS.

  Edward Giles, Esq., _Clapham Common_                         50  0  0

  Mrs. Giles,               _Do._                              50  0  0

  John Baylis, Esq., _Ponder's End_                            30  0  0

  B. L. Ward, Esq., _Stanground_                               21  0  0

  Mr. Dunnicliff, _Clifton_, near _Ashbourne_,
    by Rev. W. Hawkins                                          5  0  0


                        _Widow and Orphans' Fund._

  Lady, by Rev. John Neave, _Portsea_                           2  0  0

       *       *       *       *       *


                           TO CORRESPONDENTS.

The thanks of the Committee are returned to Mr. B. L. Ward, for
twenty-four of his pamphlets "On the Importance of Missionary Effort."
To Mr. J. E. Mogridge, Birmingham, for a parcel of books and pamphlets.
To Miss Dafforne, Camberwell, for magazines, and a parcel of small books
and lesson boards. To Mrs. Risdon, and Friends, Pershore, for work bags,
pincushions, needle-books, &c. To Mrs. Jacobs, of Wingham, for a similar
parcel. To Friends, by Rev. J. Pilkington, for ditto. To a Young Friend,
by Rev. J. M. Cramp, for pincushions, &c., prepared during long
confinement in a sick chamber; and to Ladies belonging to the Baptist
Chapel at Canterbury, for a box of useful and fancy articles for the
schools in Jamaica.

              J. HADDON, PRINTER, CASTLE STREET, FINSBURY.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Baptist Magazine, Vol. 27, June
1835, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BAPTIST MAGAZINE, VOL. ***

***** This file should be named 40542.txt or 40542.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/5/4/40542/

Produced by Bryan Ness, Charlene Taylor and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
