The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes on the Bibliography of Yucatan and
Central America, by Adolph Francis Bandelier

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Notes on the Bibliography of Yucatan and Central America
       Comprising Yucatan, Chiapas, Guatemala (the Ruins fo
       Palenque, Ocosingo, and Copan), and Oaxaca (Ruins of Mitla)

Author: Adolph Francis Bandelier

Release Date: September 10, 2012 [EBook #40728]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES ON BIBLIOGRAPHY OF YUCATAN ***




Produced by Julia Miller, Katie Hernandez and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









    NOTES ON THE BIBLIOGRAPHY

    OF

    YUCATAN AND CENTRAL AMERICA;

    COMPRISING

    YUCATAN, CHIAPAS, GUATEMALA (THE RUINS OF PALENQUE, OCOSINGO, AND
    COPAN), AND OAXACA (RUINS OF MITLA.)

    A LIST OF SOME OF THE WRITERS ON THIS SUBJECT FROM THE
    SIXTEENTH CENTURY TO THE PRESENT TIME.


    BY AD. F. BANDELIER.

    FROM PROCEEDINGS OF THE AMERICAN ANTIQUARIAN SOCIETY, OCTOBER 21, 1880.

    WORCESTER:
    PRESS OF CHAS. HAMILTON,

    311 MAIN STREET.
    1881.




NOTES

ON THE

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF YUCATAN AND CENTRAL AMERICA.[1]

BY AD. F. BANDELIER.




YUCATAN.

_Writers of the Sixteenth Century._


JUAN DIAZ, chaplain to Juan de Grijalva. "Itinerario de l' Armata del
Re Catholico in India verso la Isola de Iuchathan del anno M. D.
XVIII."--Printed first (in the Italian language) as an appendix to the
"Itinerario de Ludovico Varthema," in the edition of 1520, and
subsequently in the editions of 1522, 1526 and 1535 of the latter
book. It was also translated into the English language by Richard
Eden, in the "Historie of Travayles," London, 1577, but I am not sure
whether the report of Diaz is contained in it. The most popular
translation is that by H. Ternaux-Compans, in his first "Recueil de
pieces relatives a la conquete du Mexique," (Vol. X. of his "Voyages,
Relations et Memoires originaux pour servir a l' histoire de la
decouverte de l' Amerique,") and the latest and best reprint, together
with a splendid Spanish translation, is contained in Vol. I. of
"Coleccion de Documentos para la Historia de Mexico," 1858, by S^r J.
G. Icazbalceta, of Mexico.

       *       *       *       *       *

PETRUS MARTYR AB ANGLERIA. "Enchiridion de insulis nuper repertis
simulatque incolarum moribus," Basel, 1521. (Separate print of the 4th
Decade, which contains the first items about Yucatan ever published in
Europe after Diaz's report).

"De orbe novo decades Petri Martyris ab Angleria, Mediolaneusis,
protonotarii, Cesarei senatoris.--Compluti apud Michaelem de Eguia,"
in December, 1530. Alcala.

"Opus Epistolarum Petri Martyris Anglerii, Mediolanensis, &c., &c."
Also printed by Miguel de Eguia. Alcala.

Of further reprints, and of translations of Peter Martyr's works (the
reports on Yucatan are contained in the 4th and 5th Decades), I merely
quote: "Novus orbis regionum ac insularum veteribus incognitarum, &c."
by Simon Grynaeus, Basel, 1532, embodying Dec's 1, 2, 3, _and_ 4.

[Footnote 1: The absence of Mr. Bandelier in Mexico, precludes a
submission of the proof to his revision, and will account for any
errors that may be discovered in the text.

    PUBLISHING COMMITTEE.]

(Also the edition of 1536.)--A French translation of the 4th Decade,
by Simon de Colines, Paris, 1532.--A German version, by Honiger of
Konigshofen.--Hackluyt's reprint of 1587. "De orbe novo Petri Martyris
Anglerii, &c., &c.," and finally the complete English translation by
Michael Lok and Richard Eden: "De novo Orbe, or the Historie of the
West Indies, &c., &c.," London, 1612. I need not dwell on the great
importance of Martyr's book, for Yucatan.


HERNAN CORTES. (His first letter is lost: in place of it the letter of
the "Municipality of Vera Cruz," dated 10th July, 1519, contains a
short statement about Yucatan. This letter is printed in Vol. I. of
"Coleccion de Documentos ineditos para la historia de Espana," and in
Vol. I. of "Historiadores primitivos de Indias," by Enrique de Vedia,
Madrid, 1852.--Folsom's translation of 1843. "Despatches of Hernan
Cortes, the conqueror of Mexico, &c." substitutes an Introduction by
the translator himself.--The earliest mention of this report is found
in Robertson: "History of America," Vol. III., p. 289, Edition of
1800, and an abstract is found in Prescott: "Conquest of Mexico,"
Appendix II., 3d Vol.) "Fifth letter to the Emperor Charles VII.,"
noticed by Robertson and Prescott; contained, in full, in
"Historiadores primitivos de Indias," Vol. I., by Vedia. A full
English translation, by Pascual de Gayangos, was published in 1868, by
the "Hackluyt Society," vol. 40.


JUAN CRISTOBAL CALVET DE ESTRELLA. "De Rebus Gestis Ferdinandii
Cortesii," written between 1548 and 1560, and printed with a Spanish
translation: "Vida de Cortes," by Sr. Icazbalceta in Vol. I. of "Col.
de Documentos para la Hist. de Mexico."--Short and meagre.


ANDRES DE TAPIA. "Relacion hecha por el Senor Andres de Tapia, sobre
la conquista de Mexico." (Icazbalceta's "Coleccion de Documentos, &c."
Vol. II. Mexico, 1866.)


BENEDETTO BORDONE. "Libro di Benedetto Bordone.--Nel qual si ragione
tutte l'Isole del mondo con li loro nomi antichi e moderni,"
1528.--Later editions also.


GIROLAMO BENZONI. "Historia del Mondo Nuovo," Venice,
1565.--Translated into German by Nicolaus Hoeniger: "Die Neue Welt und
Indianischen Konigreichs, neue und wahrhaffte geschichte, &c., &c.,"
Basel, 1579.--Incorporated in Theodore De Bry "Grosse Reisen," Parts
4, 5, and 6.--Of other prints I but mention the latest English
translation, published by the Hackluyt Society in 1857 (Vol. 21,)
under the title of "History of the New World, by Girolamo Benzoni,"
edited as well as translated by Rear-Admiral W. H. Smyth. There are
Italian versions of 1572, French of 1587, and Latin of 1600.


BERNAL DIEZ DEL CASTILLO. "Historia verdadera de la Conquista de Nueva
Espana," Madrid, 1632. (There may be two editions of the same year).
Of the Spanish reprints I mention here (also contained in
"Historiadores primitivos de Indias," Vedia, 1852, Vol. II.), the one
of 1837, Paris, 4 Vols. 12^o, and the other of 1854, Mexico, 4 vols.
also.--Two English translations are known to me at present: "The True
History of the Conquest of Mexico, by Captain Bernal Diez del
Castillo," translated by Maurice Keatings, London, 1800.--"The Memoirs
of the Conquistador, Bernal Diez del Castillo," translated by John
Ingram Lockhart, London, 1844.--There is also a German translation, by
P. J. Rehfuss, Bonn, 1838.--Bernal Diez (not Diaz) is very valuable as
eye-witness, having been to Yucatan with Cordoba (1517), Grijalva
(1518), Cortes (1519),--and finally with the latter to Honduras,
passing through Peten.


FRAY LORENZO DE BIENVIDA. Letter to the Infanto Philip (II.), dated
Yucatan, 10 February, 1548. Original in MS. French translation by H.
Ternaux-Compans in "1^{er} Recueil de Pieces concernant le Mexique,"
Vol. X. 1838, of his collection of "Memoires et documents Originaux,
&c., &c."


GONZALO FERNANDEZ DE OVIEDO Y VALDES. "Historia General y natural de
las Indias," composed of 50 books.--The first 19 books, and part of
the 50th, were published by the author as early as 1535,--and the
first 20 books as early as 1557,--but the entire work has only been
printed in 1851, at Madrid, 4 Vols. folio.--It is full of details
concerning Yucatan.


FRANCISCO LOPEZ DE GOMARA. "Historia general de las Indias, y todo lo
acaescido en ellas dende que se ganaron hasta agora. Y la conquista de
Mexico, y de la nueva Espana, &c." Zaragoza, 1552.--Of this book I
quote--e. g.--the following Spanish editions: Medina del Campo, 1553,
Antwerp, 2 prints, 1554--Zaragoza, 1555,--and it is also contained in
"Historiadores primitivos de Indias," by Andres Gonzalez Barcia,
Madrid, 1749, Vol. II.--and in "Historiadores primitivos de Indias,"
by Vedia, Madrid, 1852, Vol. I.--There is an Italian version, by
Augustino de Cravaliz, Rome, 1556, ("La Histoirie generale delle Indie
Occidentali. &c., &c."), and French translations published
respectively in 1578, 1587, 1597, and 1605.--Finally, Juan Bautista de
San Anton Munoz Chimalpain Guauhtlehuanitzin made a translation into
the Mexican, or "Nahuatl" language, which C. M. Bustamante published
at Mexico, in 1826.--I know of no English translation of the work.--It
actually consists of two parts, the "Historia General," and the
"Conquista de Mexico."--The former contains a short, but fair,
description of Yucatan, and the latter a report on Cortes' doings
there and matters relating thereto.


BARTOLOME DE LAS CASAS. Of the numerous (over forty) writings of the
Bishop of Chiapas, I select only "Historia de las Indias," published
"at last," Madrid, 1875 and 1876, by the Marquis de la Fuensanta del
Valle and Don Jose Sancho Rayon, in 5 vols. The 5th Vol. contains the
famous "Apologetica Historia."--Another publication of the "Historia
de las Indias," though not as complete, has appeared in Mexico in 2
vols., as the first series of Sr. J. M. Vigel's "Biblioteca Mexicana,"
1877 and 1878.--It does not contain the "Apologetica."--Fragments of
the latter are found in Lord Kingsborough's "Antiquities of Mexico,"
Vol. VIII.

"Brevissima relacion de la destruycion de las Indias," Sevilla, 1552.
Of this polemic and strongly tinged memoir there are innumerable
versions.--I know of Spanish publications besides the above, and those
of London, 1812,--Philadelphia, 1821,--both due to Dr. De
Mier,--Madrid, J. A. Llorente, 1822, and Mexico, 1822.--Latin
translations: Francfort, 1598; Oppenheim, 1614; Heidelberg,
1664.--French translations: Antwerp, 1579; Amsterdam, 1620; Rouen,
1630; Lyon, 1642; Paris, 1697; Amsterdam, 1698. (The last two contain
each five papers of Las Casas), and Paris, 1822. "Oeuvres de Don
Bartolome de las Casas," by J. A. Llorente.--Of Italian Translations
(with Spanish text). I allude to those of 1626. Venice.--1630,
Id.:--1643, Id., and also of 1645.--There is a German translation of
1599.--Dutch translations: Amsterdam, 1610 and 1621, and 1663.--I know
of but one English translation, which bears the title "A Relation of
the first voyages and discoveries made by the Spaniards in America,
&c., &c." London, 1699,--although Dr. Robertson mentions one of
1693.--Las Casas must be used with great caution.


DIEGO DE LANDA. "Relacion de las cosas de Yucatan."

Bishop Landa was born in 1524, and died in 1579; his work must
therefore have been written between 1549 and the latter date. It was
published by the Abbe Brasseur de Bourbourg, in 1860, with a French
translation opposite to the Spanish text, and under the title of
"Relation des choses de Yucatan."--Republished again in 1864, with
some other matter.

The merits of Landa are certainly very great, but the real import of
his so-called "A. B. C." ("De sus letras forme aqui un a. b. c." pp.
316-319), has been misunderstood and correspondingly misrepresented.
The picture which Landa gives us of the customs and organization of
the Mayas is completely at variance with some of his other statements.
Much close attention is required.


"CARTAS DE INDIAS." Vol. I. Madrid, 1878.

These contain several letters and reports on Yucatan, from the 16th
century. I only refer to one, a complaint of four Indian
"gobernadores," dated 12 April, 1567, against the Bishop Diego de
Landa, designating him as "principal author of all these evils and
troubles...."


JOSEPH DE ACOSTA. "Historia natural y moral de Indias," Sevilla, 1590.
I merely mention this author, without entering into further
bibliographical details about his work. It has been translated into
many languages, and--in part or wholly--incorporated in many general
collections of "Americana." He says but little about Yucatan, still
his book is indispensable to any one studying Yucatecan antiquities. I
also advert here to his former publication, which is but little known:
"De promulgatione Evangelii apud Barbaros, sive de procuranda Indorum
salute," Libros 6; printed in 1589.


GERONIMO DE MENDIETA. "Historia ecclesiastica Indiana," written about
1590, but printed for the first time, by Sr. J. G. Icazbalceta, at
Mexico, in 1870--Contains much and valuable information.--Mendieta has
been extensively copied by Torquemada.


FRAY TORIBIO DE PAREDES, SURNAMED "MOTOLINIA." "Historia de los Indios
de Nueva-Espana," written about 1540, but published in full only by
Sr. Icazbalceta in Vol. I. of "Coleccion de Documentos, &c."--Mentions
Yucatan incidentally.--A large part of the work had been printed
before in the "Documentos ineditos, &c." under the title of
"Ritos Antiguos, Sacrificios e Idolatrias de las Indias de la
Nueva-Espana,"--also in Vol. IX. of Lord Kingsborough.--A Latin
version, under the title of "De Moribus Indorum" may have existed
once.

       *       *       *       *       *

Yucatan is, furthermore, mentioned in many works of a more general
character, embodying information gathered mostly from the sources
already referred to. I do not, therefore, enter into any lengthy
bibliographical sketches of them.

SIMON GRYNAEUS. "Novus Orbis," 1532. Already noticed under Petrus
Martyr.

PETRUS APIANUS. "Cosmographia," 1539, 1545, 1561 (Dutch version), &c.

ABRAHAM ORTELIUS. "Theatrum orbis terrarum," 1571, 1588, &c.

THOMASO PORCACCHI. "L'isole pio famose del Mondo," 1572, 1576, 1590,
&c., &c.

G. MERCATOR. "Atlas, six Cosmographical Meditations." Duisburg, 1594.

CONRAD LOEW. "Meer oder See-Ansicht Buch." Cologne, 1598.

SEBASTIAN MUNSTER. "Cosmographey," 1575, &c.

ANDRE THEVET. "Les singularites de la France antarctique, autrement
nomme Amerique, et de plusieurs Terres et Isles decouvertes de notre
temps."--Paris, 1558; Antwerp, 1558; in Italian, at Venice, 1561.

I forbear further mention of the polemic works on the origin of the
American Indians,--and now turn to some writers whose works are
probably lost, or at least not accessible, although there is positive
evidence of their former existence.

FRAY GERONIMO ROMAN. "Republica Indiana"--certainly existed as late as
1630, or "Republica de las Indias Occidentales."

FRAY ALONZO SOLANA. "Noticias Sagradas y profanas de las Antigueedades
y Conversion de los Indios de Yucatan." (Written before 1600).

DON FRANCISCO MONTEJO. "Carta al Rey sobre la fundacion de la Villa de
San Francisco de Campeche, y de la Ciudad de Merida," 14 June, 1543.
(Still at Sevilla, leg. 7. "Cartas de Indias").

In the above list I have not included any Grammar, Vocabulary,
Sermonary, "Doctrina," &c., &c., for the use of the Indians of
Yucatan, or written in the Maya language, of which several are known.
In conclusion, I beg to add the Maya writing, entitled:

"SERIES OF KATUNES," published, with an English translation, by Mr. J.
L. Stephens, in "Incidents of travels in Yucatan," and by Brasseur de
Bourbourg, in "Rel. d. ch. de Y."


_Writers of the Seventeenth Century._

ANTONIO DE HERRERA. "Historia general de los hechos de los Castellanos
en las Islas y la Tierra firme del mar Oceano," Madrid, 1601, 1615, 4
vols. folio. There are two other editions in the original language:
Madrid, 1726 and 1730, and Antwerp, 1728.

Of this most important book, several translations have appeared,
embodying either the whole or only a part.--Thus a French translation
of the "Descripcion de las Indias Occidentales," appeared at Amsterdam
in 1622 twice, and a French translation of the 1st, 2d and 3d Decades,
at Paris, 1671.--A Latin version of the "Descripcion" was also
published in 1622, by Colin, at Amsterdam, and a very unreliable
English rendering by John Stephens, in 6 vols. 8^o, appeared at London
in 1725. Herrera is one of the most important authorities on every
subject of which he treats.


GREGORIO GARCIA. "Origen de los Indios del Nuevo Mundo e Indias
Occidentales." 1st Edition, 1606; Second Edition, Madrid, 1729, by
Barcia.--A very important and valuable work.


JUAN DE TORQUEMADA. "Los veinte y uno Libros Rituales y monarchia
Indiana, con el origen y guerras de los Indios occidentales." 1st
Edition, Madrid, 1613; 2d Edition, Madrid, 1723. Barcia.


AUGUSTIN DE VETANCOURT. "Teatro Mexicano." Mexico, 1698.--2d Edition,
in "Biblioteca de la Iberia," Mexico, 1870.--Treats of Yucatan
incidentally, speaking of Cortes, &c.

The work consists properly of three books: the "Teatro," the "Cronica
de la provincia del Santo Evangelio de Mexico," and the "Menologio
franciscano."


ANTONIO DE REMESAL. "Historia general de las Indias Occidentales, y
particular de la gobernacion de Chiapas y Guatemala."--This book has
also another title: "Historia de la Provincia de San Vicente de Chyapa
y Guatemala de la Orden de San Domingo."--Madrid, 1619 and
1620.--Treats of Yucatan also, following Las Casas generally. An
important work.


BERNARDO LIZANA. (Lizama or Lizaba?) "Devocionario de Nuestra Senora
de Itzmal, Historia de Yucatan e de conquista Espiritual," 1663,
according to the Abbe Brasseur and Leon y Pinelo.--E. G. Squier speaks
of two works: one "Historia de la Provincia de Yucatan, y su conquista
Espiritual," Valladolid, 1633, and the other "Historia de Nuestra
Senora de Izamal."--Whichever way may be right, there remains
accessible as yet, but a fragment published in Spanish, with a French
translation by the Abbe Brasseur in his "Relation des choses de
Yucatan," 1864. The fragment is entitled: "Del principio y Fundacion
destos cuyos omules deste Sitio y Pueblo de Ytzmal...."--Lizana is of
the highest importance and value, and it is much to be regretted that
the _entire_ book is of such difficult access.


DIEGO LOPEZ DE COGOLLUDO. "Historia de Yucatan."--1st Edition, Madrid,
1688; 2d Edition, Merida, 1842; 3d Edition, 1867.--Cogolludo has
always been regarded as the historian of Yucatan "par excellence." He
is indeed indispensable for any study of Yucatan antiquities, but,
like all other authors, he must never be implicitly followed. The
closest criticism possible is absolutely required.


GIL GONZALEZ DAVILA. "Teatro ecclesiastico de la primitiva Iglesia de
los Indios Occidentales." Madrid, 1649.


JUAN DIAZ DE LA CALLE. "Memorial y Resumen breve de Noticias de las
Indias Occidentales." Madrid, 1654.

       *       *       *       *       *

These constitute the most important sources on Yucatan written during
the 17th century. Nearly all of them are of _special_ value, and we
would call particular attention to Cogolludo, Lizana, Torquemada,
Herrera, and Remesal. Among such authors, who wrote upon the subject
and whose writings are not now accessible, I name here:

PEDRO SANCHEZ AGUILAR. "Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan, y Informe
contra los Idolatras del Obispado de Yucatan, &c." 1639.

FRANCISCO CARDENAS. "Relacion de la Conquista y Succesos de Yucatan,"
1639. (If existing, probably in Spain).

NICOLAS LIZARRAGA. "Representacion al Rey pidiendole la Conquista de
Itza y Lacandon, con unas Noticias y Mapa de dichas Tierras."

NICOLAS DE VALENZUELA. An account of the expedition against the
Lacandones, written 1695, and comprising 402 pages.

I would further call attention to the land titles, such as Deeds,
Grants, donations, &c., &c., in Yucatan, some of which go back to the
17th century. These contain occasional references to the Indian
settlements, some of which are certainly of great value and
importance.

Finally, I refer to some general works, treating of Yucatan:

SAMUEL PURCHAS. "His Pilgrimage, &c., &c." London, 1613, 1614 and
1617. (This forms the 5th volume of Purchas' great works).--The great
work of Purchas, also known as "Hackluytus Posthumous," appeared in
1625, and treats also of Yucatan.

O. DAPPER. "Die unbekannte neue Welt, oder Beschreibung des
Welt-theils Amerikas, &c." Amsterdam, 1673. This is in fact but a
translation of the following:

ARIAS MONTANUS. "De Nieuvre en Onbekende Weereld: of Beschryving van
America en t' Zuid Lande." Amsterdam, 1671.

MATHIAS QUAD. "Enchiridion Cosmographicum: Dass ist, Ein Handbuechlein,
der gantzen Welt gelegenheit, &c." Cologne, 1604 and 1608.

JOANNES PETRUS MAFFEI. "... historiarum Indicarum libri XVI., &c."
Antwerp, 1605--frequently reprinted and translated.

JACOBUS VIVERUS. (Van de Vijvere). "Handbook: of Cort begrijp der
Caerten Ende Beschryvinghen van allen Landen des Werelds." Amsterdam,
1609. (This is the 2d edition of an anonymous atlas).

CORNELIUS WYTFLICT ET ANTHOINE MAGIN. "Histoire universelle des Indes
occidentales et orientales," Douay, 1611.

GASPARD ENS. "West und Ost-Indischer Lustgart.:...." Cologne, 1618.

AUBERTUS MIRAEUS. "De statu religiones christianae...." Cologne, 1619.

ATHANASIUS INGA. "West-Indische Spiegel, &c." Amsterdam, 1624.

JOHANN PHILIPP ABELIN. (Gottfriedt). "Neue Welt und Americanische
Historien." Francfort, a. m. 1655.

A. O. EXQUEMELIN. "De Amerikaensche Zee-Roovers." Amsterdam, 1678.
(Innumerable translations, &c. &c).

EBERHARD WERNER HAPPEL. "Thesaurus Exoticorum." Hamburg, 1688.
(Indifferent compilation).

I do not include in this hasty bibliographical list any linguistical
works whatever,--or writings on the plants and medicinal herbs of
Spanish-America. Purposely I omit also Antonio de Solis, whose history
of the conquest of Mexico has a great literary, but hardly any
scientific, value.


_Writers of the Eighteenth Century._

JUAN DE VILLAGUTIERRE Y SOTOMAYOR. "Historia de la Conquista y
Reducciones de los Itzaes y Lacandones en la America Septentrional."
Madrid, 1701. The first part only, composed of 10 books,--the second
part may not have been completed,--at least it has remained unknown
till now. The work is of the highest importance, especially for that
part of Yucatan which has since hardly been explored.


ABBATE FRANCESCO SAVERIO CLAVIGERO. S. J. "Storia antica del Messico."
Cesena, 1780, 1781. Spanish translations: London, 1826; Mexico, 1844,
id. 1853. English translation: London, 1787. German version: Leipzig,
1789. (The English copy by Sir Charles Cullen),--all these works
mention Yucatan also.


ANTONIO DE ALCEDO. "Diccionario geografico-historico de las Indias
Occidentales o America...." Madrid, 1786-1789. 5 vols. 4^o.--English
translation by G. A. Thompson. London, 1812-15.


JOSEPH ANTONIO DE VILLA-SENOR Y SANCHEZ. "Teatro Americano." Mexico,
1746.--Of indirect value for Yucatan. (2 vols. folio).


J. LAFITAN. S. J. "Moeurs des sauvages americains, comparees aux
moeurs des premiers temps." Paris, 1724. (There is a Dutch
translation: "De Zeden der Wilden van Amerika," but I have no access
to its date at present).--The best ethnological work previous to 1850.


ABBE GUILLAUME THOMAS RAYNAL. "Histoire philosophique et politique des
etablissements et du commerce des Europeens dans les deux Indes."
Paris, 1780, and other editions. English translation. Edinburgh, 1782.


WILLIAM ROBERTSON. "History of America." (Numberless editions and
translations, all too well known to require special mention
here).--Highly important.


CHEVALIER DE PAUW. "Recherches philosophiques sur les Americains."
London, 1771. A strongly negative, and through its exaggerations in
that direction, very injudicious work. Still it should be read
attentively, as well as the rejoinder to it by Dom Pernetty.


GEMELLI CARRERI. (Properly belongs to the 17th century). "Giro del
Mondo...." Naples, 1721.--French: "Voyage du Tour du Monde." Paris,
1719.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Library of the Cathedral of Mexico there still exists:

ARTURO O'NEIL. "Descripcion, Poblacion, y censo de la Provincia de
Yucatan en la Nueva Espana." 1795.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have also notice of the former existence of the following works,
by:

FRAY ANDRES AVENDANO. "Diccionario de nombres de personas, idolos,
danzas, y otras antiqueedades de los Indios de Yucatan."

"Explicacion de varios Vaticinios de los antiguos Indios de Yucatan."

       *       *       *       *       *

To take notice of all the geographical works, cyclopaedias, &c., &c.,
published in the 18th century, and which contain notices of Yucatan,
would be a task exceeding far the time and limits of this list. It can
easily be proved, however, that the works on especially Yucatecan
topics are not numerous. This may be due, in part, to the rigorous
exclusion of foreigners from Spanish America, and the consequent
decline of intellectual activity towards the close of Spanish
domination. The great collection of Juan Bautista Munoz contains
hardly anything on Yucatan.


_Writers of the Nineteenth Century._

Here the number of publications increases so rapidly, that I cannot
attempt to notice all. Besides, many of the authors are so well known
that a mere mention of their names and the titles of their works will
suffice. Periodicals containing papers on Yucatan, will be mentioned
generally, but detailed reference to special articles can be given
only in a few exceptional instances. The latest works will only be
alluded to.


ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT. "Essai politique sur le royaume de la
Nouvelle-Espagne." Paris, 1811, 2 vols. 4^o.--Id. Paris, 1811, 5 vols.
8^o.--Paris, 1825-27, 4 vols. 8^o. Spanish translation: Madrid, 1818.
English translation by John Black. London, 1811. Also translated into
the German. References to Yucatan and its inhabitants may also be
found in "Ansichten der Natur," (Notes), and even in "Kosmos."


FRIEDRICH VON WALDECK. "Voyage pittoresque et archeologique dans la
Province de Yucatan." Paris, 1838. Splendid, but the drawings are
mostly restorations,--therefore suspicious.


ANTONIO DEL RIO.

(The date of this report is: "Palenque 24 June, 1787," and I shall
refer to it more particularly under the heading of "Chiapas,"--still,
as it contains the report of the Franciscan, Thomas de Soza, on
Yucatecan ruins, I place it here also).

"Description of the Ruins of an ancient City, discovered near
Palenque, in the Kingdom of Gautemala, in Central America; translated
from the original manuscript report of Captain Don Antonio del Rio."
London, 1822.--There are two German translations: one "Huehuetlapallan,
Amerika's grosse Urstadt, &c." Meiningen, 1824, and v. Minutoli's
"Beschreibung einer alten Stadt in Guatemala." 1832.--A French
translation, by D. B. Warden, in "Antiquites Mexicaines." Vol. II.
and, finally, the Spanish original, in "Diccionario universal de
Geografia, &c." Vol. VIII.--See also abstract in "Mosaico Mexicano."
Vol. II.


LORENZO DE ZAVALA. Report on Uxmal, published in Vol. I. of
"Antiquites Mexicaines."


JOHN L. STEPHENS. "Travels in Central America, Chiapas, and Yucatan."
N. York, 1841.

"Incidents of travel in Yucatan." N. York, 1843.


F. CATHERWOOD. "Views of Ancient Monuments in Central America, Chiapas
and Yucatan." N. York, 1844.


B. M. NORMAN. "Rambles in Yucatan." N. York, 1843.


CHARLES ST. JOHN FANCOURT. "The History of Yucatan." London,
1854.--Not of great value.


EMMANUEL VON FRIEDRICHSTHAL. Letter of 21 April, 1841, in "Registro
Yucateco," Vol. II., and "Diccionario Universal," Vol. X.--"Les
Monuments de l'Yucatan," in "Nouvelles Annales des Voyages," 1841,
Vol. 92.--These papers are not very valuable.


JUAN GALINDO. Report on the antiquities of Lake Peten. "Antiquites
Mexicaines," Vol. I.


MODESTO MENDEZ. Report on Tikal. "Zeitschrift fuer allgemeine
Erdkunde," Vol. I.; 1853; also in Siver's "Mittelamerika" and other
places. He is, as yet, the only authority on Tikal.


JULIUS FROEBEL. "Aus Amerika, Erfahrungen, Reisen, und Studien."
Leipzig.--English translation: "Seven years travel in Central
America." London, 1861.


CARL BARTHOLOMAUS HELLER. "Reisen in Mexico." Leipzig, 1853.--Rather
fair and moderate.


DESIRE CHARNAY, and VIOLLET LE DUC. "Cites et Ruines americaines."
Paris, 1863.--Invaluable for its photographs.


ARTHUR MORELET. "Voyage dans l'Amerique centrale, l'Ile de Cuba, et la
Yucatan." Paris, 1857. English translation by Mrs. E. G. Squier.
"Itza, or the unexplored regions of Central America." London, 1871.--A
very attractive and valuable work.


CHARLES ETIENNE BRASSEUR DE BOURBOURG. "Histoire des Nations
Civilisees du Mexique et de l'Amerique centrale." Paris, 1857-9.
"Rapport sur les Ruines de Mayapan et d'Uxmal," in "Archives de la
Comission scientifique du Mexique," Vol. II.

"Relation des choses de Yucatan." Paris, 1864. (See Landa and Lizana).

"Quatre Lettres sur le Mexique." Paris, 1868.

"Manuscrit Troano." Paris, 1869-1870.

The late Abbe Brasseur was certainly the greatest of all modern
travellers in Mexico and Central America, as far as extent of travel
and long duration of stay are concerned. He knew those countries
better, and had easier access to the natives, than any other similar
traveller of this century. His works are therefore, actual mines of
wealth so far as old documents are concerned: he has collected and
brought to light more manuscripts than any other student. But his
honest zeal and unrestrained enthusiasm have led him into paths on
which he has wandered lamentably astray. His works are indispensable,
though very little of his own conclusions can be believed.

JUAN PIO PEREZ. "Cronologia antigua de Yucatan," in "Relation des
choses de Yucatan." 1864. Diccionario de la Lengua haya. Merida, 1877.


MANUEL OROZCO Y BERRA. "Geografia de las Lenguas y Carta etnogratica
de Mexico." Mexico, 1864.


AMERICAN ANTIQUARIAN SOCIETY, Worcester, Mass. _Proceedings No. 44._
Oct. 1865, page 63. Report of S. F. Haven, LL.D.

_Proceedings No. 55._ Oct. 1870, page 42. Report of S. F. Haven, LL.D.

_Proceedings No. 56._ April, 1871, page 7. Report of S. F. Haven,
LL.D.

_Proceedings No. 66._ April, 1876, page 16. "The Mayas," by Stephen
Salisbury, jr.

_Proceedings No. 69._ April. 1877, page 70. "Dr. Le Plongeon in
Yucatan," by Stephen Salisbury, jr.

_Proceedings No. 70._ Oct. 1877, page 89. Report of S. F. Haven, LL.D.

_Proceedings No. 71._ April, 1878, page 71. "Terra Cotta Figure from
Isla Mujeres," by Stephen Salisbury, jr. Page 91, "The Mexican
Calendar Stone," by Philipp J. J. Valentini, Ph.D.

_Proceedings No. 72._ Oct. 1878, page 65. "Archaeological Communication
on Yucatan," by Augustus Le Plongeon, M.D. Page 77, "Notes on
Yucatan," by Mrs. Alice D. Le Plongeon.

Proceedings No. 73._ April, 1879, page 81. "Mexican Copper Tools," _by
Philipp J. J. Valentini, Ph.D. Page 113, "Letter from Dr. Augustus Le
Plongeon."

_Proceedings No. 74._ Oct. 1879, page 71. "The Katunes of Maya
History," by Philipp J. J. Valentini, Ph.D.

_Proceedings No. 75._ April, 1880, page 59. "The Landa Alphabet," by
Philipp J. J. Valentini, Ph.D.

_Proceedings No. 76._ Oct. 1880, page 58. "Mexican Paper," by Philipp
J. J. Valentini, Ph.D. Page 82, "Notes on the Bibliography of Yucatan
and Central America," by Ad. F. Bandelier.


PHILIPP J. J. VALENTINI. "A new, and an old Map of Yucatan," in
"Magazine of American History," 1879.


ALBERT GALLATIN. "Notes on the semi-civilized nations of Mexico,
Yucatan, and Central America," in Vol. I. of "Transactions of the
American Ethnological Society." N. York, 1845.


A. AUBIN. "Memoire sur la peinture didactique et l'ecriture figurative
des anciens mexicaines." Paris, 1859-1861. (4 papers, published also
in the "Revue americaine et Orientale." 1st Series, Vols. III., IV.
and V.)


LEON DE ROSNY. "Les ecritures figuratives et hieroglyphiques des
peuples anciens et modernes." Paris, 1860.

"Memoire sur la Numeration dans la Langue et dans l'ecriture sacree
des anciens Mayas." (Compte-Rendu du "Congres international des
americanistes." 1875, Vol. II.)

"Essai sur le dechiffrement de l'ecriture hieratique de l'Amerique
Centrale." Paris, 1876.--Still continued.


FRANCISCO PIMENTEL. "Cuadro descriptivo y comparativo de las Lenguas
Indigenas de Mexico." Mexico, 1862.

German translation, by Isidor Epstein. N. York, 1877.


HYACINTHE DE CHARENCY. "Recherches sur le Codex Troano." Paris, 1876.


D. GERONIMO CASTILLO. "Diccionario Historico, Biografico y Monumental
de Yucatan." Merida, 1866. 2 vols.


SERAPIO BAQUEIRO. "Ensayo Historico sobre las Revoluciones de Yucatan,
1840--1864." Merida, 1870. 2 vols.


GUSTAV KLEMM. "Allgemeine Culturgeschichte der Menschheit." 10 vols.
Leipzig, 1843-1852.


HEINRICH WUeTTKE. "Die Enstehung der Schrift."


EDWARD KING, LORD KINGSBOROUGH. "Antiquities of Mexico." 1831-1848,
London, 9 vols. folio. Special value of plates.


DE LARENANDIERE. "Mexique et Guatemala," in "Univers pittoresque."
Paris, 1843.


WM. H. PRESCOTT. "History of the Conquest of Mexico." (Too well known
to need any remarks).


LEWIS H. MORGAN. "Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human
Family." 1871.

(No. 218 of "Smithsonian Contributions to Knowledge.")

"American aboriginal Architecture." Johnson's Encyclopedia, Vol. I.

"Ancient Society." New York, 1877.


HUBERT HOWE BANCROFT. "The Native Races of the Pacific States." 5
vols. N. York, 1875.


JOHN D. BALDWIN. "Ancient America." New York, 1872.


JOSE M. MELGAR Y SERRANO. "Examen comparativo entre los Signos
simbolicos, &c." Vera Cruz, 1872.


GUSTAV BRUeHL. "Die Culturvoelker Alt-Amerika's." New York, Cincinnati,
and St. Louis, 1876, 1877, and 1878.


ADOLPH BASTIAN. "Die Culturlaender des alten America's." Berlin, 1878.
2 vols.


JOHN T. SHORT. "The North Americans of Antiquity." New York, 1879.

       *       *       *       *       *

I further refer to papers in

"NOUVELLES ANNALES DES VOYAGES." 1843. By H. Ternaux-Compans.

"REGISTRO YUCATECO." Vols. I. and II.

And to the publications of

CRESCENCIO CARRILLO, Licenciado. (I have but glanced at one of his
works).

ELIGIO ANCONA. "Historia de Yucatan." Merida, 1875. 4 vols.

MANUEL LARRAINZAR. "Estudios sobre la Historia de America, sus Ruinas
y Antigueedades." Mexico, 1875. 5 vols.

       *       *       *       *       *

On most of the works like those of Prescott, Bancroft, Baldwin, and
others, I need not comment, having already expressed my opinion in
"Art of War and Mode of Warfare of the Ancient Mexicans," and "Tenure
and Distribution of Lands, and Customs with respect to Inheritance
among the Ancient Mexicans."--(10th and 11th Reports of the Peabody
Museum). In regard to Yucatecan paintings and carvings, I have
expressed my convictions in "Sources for aboriginal history of Spanish
America," Vol. 27 of the "Proceedings of the American Association for
advancement of Science." 1878.

I repeat it, this attempt at a bibliography on Yucatecan antiquities
is far from being complete,--many works of greater or less importance
having probably been overlooked.




CHIAPAS.


This district or State contains the well known ruins of Palenque and
Ocosingo. Still, but very few of the works hereafter mentioned relate
to these places. It is therefore a bibliography of Chiapas and of its
aborigines:--Zendal, Zoques, Zotzil, Chiapanecos, &c., and not a
special bibliography of Palenque, &c., which I intend to
present,--convinced that our lack of knowledge on the aborigines of
Chiapas in general is a chief cause of our ignorance about the past
history of these remains.

A large number of authors treating of Chiapas have already been
noticed in regard to Yucatan, and in such cases I merely give the
author's name, without the title or any other reference to his works,
except when there are special reasons for it.


_Writers of the Sixteenth Century._

DIEGO DE GODOY. "Relacion a Hernando Cortez, en que trata del
Descubrimiento de diversas Ciudades i Provincias, i Guerra que tuvo
con los Indios, &c., de la Provincia de Chamula."--First incorporated
in the "Historia general" of Oviedo y Valdes, again in Barcia's
"Historiadores primitivos de Indias," and in "Historiadores primitivos
de Indias" of Vedia.--French translation by Ternaux-Compans, in
1^{st}, "Recueil de pieces concernant la Mexique, &c."--Also Italian
in "Ramusio," Vol. III.

GONZALO FERNANDEZ DE OVIEDO Y VALDES.

HERNAN CORTEZ.--"Carta quinta."

FRANCISCO LOPEZ DE GOMARA.

BERNAL DIEZ DEL CASTILLO. (Eye-witness of the conquest of Chiapa.)

BARTOLOME DE LAS CASAS. (Especially the "Apologetica historia.")

GERONIMO DE MENDIETA. (Incidental mention.)

In the 2d "_Recueil de pieces concernant le Mexique_," of
Ternaux-Compans, there is a complaint or letter of an anonymous author
against Las Casas, dated Chiapas.--I also refer to "_Cartas de
Indias_," Vol. I., containing several letters of Las Casas himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is, in fact, but very little published about the antiquities of
Chiapas, during the 16th century. I do not even mention any of the
general collections which have an occasional reference to the name.
But few vocabularies are noticed. Still we are informed of the
following works, which may yet be in existence, or which at all events
have existed once, and were written during the 16th century.

FRAY TOMAS TORRE. "Historia de los principios de la Provincia de
Chiapas y Guatemala, del Orden de Santo Domingo."

FRAY DOMINGO VICO. "Historia de los Indios, sus fabulas,
supersticiones, costumbres, &c., &c."

The library of the "Museo Nacional" of the City of Guatemala, contains
a number of fragments of a "_Historia de la Provincia de San Vicente
Ferrer de Chiapas y Guatemala_," the third book of which is
superscribed: "Isagoge historico apologetico general de todas las
Indias."--There is no date nor name of author, but it can be
conjectured that it was written in the 16th century.--Gregorio Garcia
also quotes: _Fray Estevan de Salazar_. "Discurs. Symb. apost." who in
turn is said to refer to a book entitled "_Historia, i Relacion de la
Teologia de los Indios Mexicanos_," said book being lost in a
shipwreck, 1564.


_Writers of the Seventeenth Century._

    GREGORIO GARCIA.
    ANTONIO DE HERRERA.
    JUAN DE TORQUEMADA.
    ANTONIO DE REMESAL.
    AUGUSTIN DE VETANCOURT.
    GIL GONZALEZ DAVILA.
    JUAN DIAZ DE LA CALLE.


AUGUSTIN DAVILA-PADILLA. "Historia de la Fundacion y Discurso de la
Provincia de Santiago de Mexico." 1st edition, Madrid, 1596; 2d
edition, Brussels, 1625.--Mentions Chiapas only in connection with the
biography of Las Casas.--The first edition has almost disappeared, so
that it is practically a book of the 17th century.


AUGUSTIN CANO. "Historia de la Provincia de Predicadores de
San-Vicente de Chiapas y Guatemala."--Fragment of a MS. at the "Museo
Nacional" of Guatemala.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following books are known to have existed once:

FRAY JUAN ZAPATA Y SANDOVAL. "Cartas al Conde de Gomera ... sobre los
Indios de Chiapas."

"Cartas al Rey sobre el Estado Dulce Diocesis de Chiapas."

       *       *       *       *       *

I make no mention of the compilations and general collections
containing references to Chiapas. They are not numerous.--Gregorio
Garcia in his book, "Origen de los Indios," has probably the earliest
mention of the ruins of Ocosingo, and even perhaps, some indication
about those of Palenque.--Cortez who, accompanied by Bernal Diez,
passed very near Palenque in 1525, did not take any notice of the
pueblo,--which at that time was certainly not inhabited.


_Writers of the Eighteenth Century._


NUNEZ DE LA VEGA. "Constituciones diocesanas del Obispado de Chiapas."
Rome, 1702.

Important for its reports on the idolatrous rites and the traditions
of the aborigines.


LORENZO BOTURINI BERNADUCCI. "Idea de una Nueva Historia General de la
America Septentrional." Madrid, 1746.

Valuable for his mention of the Calendar of Chiapas.


MARIANO FERNANDEZ DE VEYTIA Y ECHEVERRIA. "Historia del Origen de las
gentes que poblaron la America Septentrional que llaman la
Nueva-Espana, con noticia de los primeros que establecieron la
monarquia que en ella florecio de la nacion Tolteca."--This work has
been published as lately as 1836, at Mexico, by C. F. Ortega, under
the title of "Historia antigua de Mexico."--It contains notices of the
calendar of Chiapas.


F. X. CLAVIGERO. S. J. (ABBATE.)

ANTONIO DE ALCEDO.

JOSEPH ANTONIO DE VILLA-SENOR Y SANCHEZ.


FRANCISCO XIMENEZ. "Cronica de la Provincia de Chiapas y
Guatemala,"--of which part of the 7th book is at the "Museo Nacional"
of Guatemala.

"Historia de la Provincia de predicadores de San Vicente de Chiapas y
Guatemala." Written about 1720,--and possibly the same work as the
above.--According to Brasseur de Bourbourg, 3 volumes which did not
suit or fit together and were the remnants of two MSS. copies of the
original, existed at the University of Guatemala in 1855.


TORIBIO COSIO. "Relacion historica de la Sublevacion y Pacificacion de
la Provincia de los Tzendales." (May still exist at Mexico.)


FRANCISCO VASQUEZ. "Cronica de la Provincia del Ill'mo Nombre de
Jesus, del Orden de San Francisco de Guatemala."--Guatemala, 1714 and
1716, 2 vols.--The library of Guatemala ("Museo Nacional") still
contains an anonymous MS. of 13 Leaves, "Notas y Advertencias" to the
above work.--Whether the "Cronica" itself is at Guatemala, I am unable
to say. The book is very scarce. Mr. Squier owned the first volume
only.


Anonymous. "Relacion de la Sublevacion de los Zendales, en el ano de
1712." MS. Perhaps still at the city of Guatemala.


RAMON DE ORDONEZ Y AGUIAR. "Historia de la Creacion del Cielo y de la
Tierra, conforme al sistema de la gentilidad americana." MS. at the
"Museo Nacional" of the city of Mexico.--Very important for the
traditions of Chiapas.

"Memoria relativa a las ruinas de Nachan, en las inmediaciones del
pueblo de Santo Domingo del Palenque." MS. formerly belonged to
Brasseur de Bourbourg. It was written about 1784, and is the first
authentic report on the celebrated ruins.


D. NAXERA. "Vida portentosa del V. P. Fr. Antonio Margil de Jesus."
Mexico, 1753.


H. VILAPLANA. "Vida portentosa del americano septentrional apostol
Antonio Margil de Jesus...." Mexico, 1763. (Margil was one of the
earliest missionaries in Chiapas.)


_Documents relative to the explorations of Palenque._

Besides the "Memoria" of Ordonez already quoted, which first directed
attention to the ruined pueblo, there exist the following documents:

JOSE DE ESTACHERIA. "Expediente sobre el descubrimiento de una gran
Ciudad en la provincia de Chiapas, distrito de Guatemala." 28 Nov.
1784. (Archives of the royal Academy, at Madrid).--It is directed to
the lieutenant "Alcalde mayor" of Chiapas, at S^{to} Domingo del
Palenque, directing him to survey the ruins.

JOSEF ANTONIO CALDERON. "Informe, fecho en 15 de Diciembre de 1784."
Description of the ruins. MSS. translated and published by Brasseur in
"Ruines de Palenque," 1866.


ANTONIO BERNASCONI. Other reports on the ruins, accompanied by plans
and drawings. MS. in Spain. Date, 13 June, 1578.

JUAN BAUTISTA MUNOZ. Letter to the Marquis de Sonora, written 1786.
Translated by Brasseur: "Ruines de Palenque." 1866.

ANTONIO DEL RIO. "Descripcion del terreno y poblacion antigua
nuevamente descubierta en las inmediaciones del pueblo del
Palenque."--I have already referred to it under "Yucatan." Whether the
plates of the English edition are genuine, is yet doubtful.

       *       *       *       *       *

I must add here, that until about 1820, the state of Chiapas
pertained, not to Mexico, but to the captain-generalcy of Guatemala,
and consequently all the authorities treating of the latter country
may be supposed to contain information about Chiapas also.


_Writers of the Nineteenth Century._

(Explorations of Palenque.)

JUAN GARRIDO. _Said_ to have written about Palenque in 1805.

GUILLERMO DUPAIX AND LUCIANO CASTANEDA. "Relacion hecha al Rey, sobre
tres expediciones, &c." in 1805, 1806, and 1807. They visited Palenque
late in 1807.--Their reports and drawings were first published in
1831, in Vols. IV. and V. of Lord Kingsborough's "Antiquities of
Mexico," and an English translation in Vol. VI.--A French and Spanish
version, together with all the plates, is contained in "Antiquites
mexicaines." Paris, 1834.--The drawings of Castaneda are by far the
most complete which we have, although they disagree with many of those
of other travellers. This disagreement will be referred to hereafter.

JUAN GALINDO. "Palenque et autres lieux circonvoisins." Letter dated
27 April, 1831, in "Antiquites mexicaines," Vol. I.--English
translation in the "Literary Gazette," No. 769, London, 1831.--Col.
Galindo visited Palenque himself, but he is so enthusiastic that all
his statements and even measurements should be taken with many
allowances.

FRIEDRICH VON WALDECK. "Description des ruines de Palenque," with 56
large plates, in "Monuments anciens du Mexique." Paris, 1866.--M. de
Waldeck had spent two years at Palenque (1832-1834,)--his plates are
magnificent, but they restore far too much.

JOHN L. STEPHENS. "Travels in Central America, Chiapas, and Yucatan."
N. York, 1841.

"Incidents of Travel in Yucatan." 1843.

F. CATHERWOOD. (See Yucatan.)

ARTHUR MORELET. (See Yucatan.) Visited P. in 1846.

DESIRE CHARNAY. (See Yucatan.) In 1858.

CHARLES ETIENNE BRASSEUR DE BOURBOURG. "Ruines de Palenque," in
"Monuments anciens du Mexique," 1866, Paris.--Valuable for the
historical introductions and for the numerous references to
authorities. The historical essay is a confused and disorderly
jumble, barely readable.--The Abbe visited Palenque subsequently--in
1871.

To these reports I finally add:

CHARLES RAU. "The Palenque tablet in the United States National
Museum," Washington, D. C., 1879. (No. 331 of "Smithsonian
Contributions to Knowledge.")

       *       *       *       *       *

Aside from the numberless historical, archaeological, and ethnological
works, several of which I have already noticed under "Yucatan," I beg
to refer to some specifically Central-American and Mexican sources
treating of Chiapas in general, with some occasional mention of
Palenque and of Ocosingo, or even without any particular reference to
them.


DOMINGO JUARROS. "Compendio de la Historia de Guatemala,"
1808--1818.--English translation by J. Bailly, London, 1823.


FRANCISCO DE PAULA GARCIA L'ELAEZ. "Memorias para la Historia del
antiguo Reyno de Guatemala." 3 vols. Guatemala, 1851.--An excellent
work, full of valuable and reliable information.


HYACINTHE DE CHARENCY. "Le Mythe de Votan." Alencon, 1871.--Ingenious
speculations.


FELIX CABRERA. "Teatro critico-americano."--Published with the
different editions of Del Rio.--Abstract from Nunez de la Vega, with
more or less hypothetical speculations about the origin, life, and
doings of "Votan" in Chiapas.


MARIANO ROBLES DOMINGUEZ DE MAZARIEGOS. "Memoria historica de la
provincia de Chiapas...." Cadiz, 1813.


EMILIO PINEDA. "Descripcion Geografica del Departamento de Chiapas y
Soconusco." In the "Boletin de la Sociedad de geografia y Estadistica
de Mexico." Vol. III. Also, Mexico, 1845.


JOSE DE GARAY. "Reconocimiento del Istmo de Tehuantepec." Mexico,
1844.


FRANCISCO PIMENTEL. "Cuadro descriptivo de las Lenguas indigenas, &c."
(See Yucatan.)


MANUEL OROZCO Y BERRA. "Geografia de las Lenguas." (See Yucatan.)

       *       *       *       *       *

In the imperfect list herewith submitted I have frequently included
works of which nothing is known save that they once existed. This is
done for the purpose of calling attention to them, should any one of
them be found in the hands of book owners and collectors here or
abroad. Libraries like those of Mr. Lenox or of Mr. John Carter-Brown
should be searched for such writings, and copies at least should be
secured. The plan of Palenque, made by Bernasconi, in 1785, should
also be copied without delay. A copy can be obtained from Madrid, by
application to the Royal Academy of Spain.




GUATEMALA. (Copan and Chiapas included.)


_Writers of the Sixteenth Century._

HERNAN CORTES. (4th and 5th letter. Casual mention.)


PEDRO DE ALVARADO. Seventeen letters to Hernan Cortes, the first of
which is dated: Utlatlan, 11 April, 1524. Only two of those letters
were printed, the remaining fifteen are yet in MSS. Mr. E. G. Squier
owned MS. copies of the whole, but whither they went at his sale I do
not know. The two which were published (11 April and 28 July),
appeared in the following works: "Delle navigationi et viaggi, &c." by
Gian Battista Ramusio. Venice, Italian version. The "due lettere de
Pietro d' Alvarado," are contained in the 3d volume, editions of 1556,
1565, and 1606.


OVIEDO. "Historia y natural de las Indias." Vol. III. Written between
1535 and 1557, but printed only 1853. Madrid.


ANDRES GONZALEZ BARCIA. "Historiadores primitivos de Indias." Madrid,
1749, Vol. I.


H. TERNAUX-COMPANS. "Premier recueil de pieces relatives a la conquete
du Mexique." Paris, 1838.--French translation.


ENRIQUE DE VEDIA. "Historiadores primitivos de Indias." Madrid, 1852.
(Vol. I.)

These letters, from the conqueror of Guatemala, are very important,
and the 15 unpublished ones should be printed at the earliest possible
moment.


FRANCISCO LOPEZ DE GOMARA. (Quite full, and mentions the earliest
author giving the etymology--or rather, an etymology--of the word
"Cuauhtemallan"--This is the earliest _printed_ notice about it.)


GONZALO FERNANDEZ DE OVIEDO Y VALDES. (Has other information besides
Alvarado's letters.)


BARTOLOME DE LAS CASAS. (Very important, particularly on the interior
provinces pertaining or adjacent to his bishopric of Chiapas.)


GIROLAMO BENZONI. (Visited Guatemala himself, and although brief, he
still is valuable.)


PETRUS MARTYR, AB ANGLERIA. (Brief notice, in connection with the
movements of Alvarado, in the last decade, Cap's V. and X.--earliest
reports on Guatemala in general, received in Europe.)


FRAY TORIBIO DE PAREDES, SURNAMED MOTOLINIA. (Not only the "Historia
de las Indias de Nueva-Espana," contains incidental reference to
Guatemala,--but there is a trace of a "Viaje a Guatemala."--Yet the
latter is still in doubt.)


FRAY GERONIMO DE MENDIETA.


BERNAL DIEZ DEL CASTILLO. (Although a citizen of Spanish Guatemala,
his reports are not very full.)


"REQUETO DE PLUSIEURS CHEFS D'ATITLAN." Addressed, under date of 1
Feb'y, 1571, to Philip II. Published in French, by H. Ternaux-Compans,
in 1^{st} "Recueil de pieces concernant le Mexique," 1838.--It is
valuable.


PASCUAL DE ANDAGOYA. "Relacion de los sucesos de Pedrarias Davila en
las provincias de Tierra firme o Castilla del oro, y de lo ocurrido en
el descubrimiento de la mar del Sur y costas del Peru y Nicaragua."
About 1545.--Original at Sevilla, printed for the first time by Don
Martin Fernandez de Navarrete, in 1829. Vol. III. of "Coleccion de los
Viajes y Descubrimientos, &c."--English translation, by C. R. Markham,
published under the title of "The Narrative of Pascual de Andagoya,"
by the Hackluyt Society, Vol. 34, 1865.--Slight mention is made of
Guatemala.


ALONZO DE ZURITA. (Corita?) "Breve y Sumaria Relacion de los
Senores, y maneras y diferencias que habia de ellos en la
Nueva-Espana...."--This important official document, written about
1560, has been published but once in Spanish,--in Vol. II. of
"Coleccion de Documentos Ineditos relativos al Descubrimiento,
Conquista y Colonizacion de las Posesiones Espanolas en America y
Oceania," 1865.--The text is, however, imperfect.--A better original
had been used by Ternaux-Compans for his French translation: "Rapport
sur les diffirentes classes de la Nouvelle-Espagne."--Zurita is very
important on the organization of the Quiche tribes of Guatemala, and
he has been almost verbally copied by Herrera.


DIEGO GARCIA DE PALACIO. "Carta dirigida al Rey de Espana," 1576,
March 8th.--The chief importance of this report, in connection with
this list, consists in its being the earliest notice of the ruins of
Copan. Herrera made extensive use of Palacio's writings, but he
omitted that part which referred to Copan because it was not confirmed
(at his time) by any other testimony. The first publication of Palacio
was by Ternaux-Compans, in 1840, "Recueil de Documents et memoires
originaux sur l'histoire des possessions espagnoles, &c."--French
translation: fluent, but not always reliable. A Spanish copy appeared
in 1866, in Vol. VII. of "Coleccion de Documentos Ineditos...."--A
Spanish copy, with English translation, by E. G. Squier, in 1860, as
Vol. I. of his "collection of rare and original documents, relations,
&c., &c."--Finally. Dr. Alexander von Frantzius published a German
translation in 1873, under the heading of "San Salvador and Honduras
im Jahre, 1576,"--which is particularly valuable on account of the
notes by the translator, as well as by Dr. C. H. Berendt.--Palacio
must have visited Copan about 1576, and the fact is established
through him that its buildings were in ruins at the time of the
Spanish conquest, that is about 1530, and no distinct traditions of
their origin left.

       *       *       *       *       *

Passing over all general collections and geographical works, &c., &c.,
of the sixteenth century, I will mention:

"CARTAS DE INDIAS." (See Yucatan.) and the miscellaneous collections
like _"Coleccion de Documentos ineditos para la Historia de Espana,"
begun by Navarrete_, Miguel Salva, and Pedro Saing de Barada, in 1842,
and still continued.

"_Coleccion de Documentos relativos al Descubrimiento, Conquista y
Colonizacion de las Posesiones Espanolas en America y Oceania._"
Commenced in 1864, and still continued.

(These collections contain chiefly documents from the "Real Archivo de
Indias," and although they are of recent date, the papers are all from
the earlier times of Spanish conquest and settlement.)

       *       *       *       *       *

The library of the "Museo Nacional" at the City of Guatemala (la
Nueva), contains the following:

RAFAEL AREVALO. "Libro de Actas del Ayuntamiento de la Ciudad de
Guatemala." (Town book or record, from 1524 to 1530.)

"Coleccion de Documentos antiguos del Archivo del Ayuntamiento de la
Ciudad de Guatemala."--(Both bound in one volume and published in 1856
and 1857.)

MANUSCRIPTS. "Libro segundo del Cabildo de la Ciudad de Santiago de la
Provincia del Guatemala." (1530 to 1541.)

"Libro tercero de Cabildo." (1541 to 1543.)

"Historia de la Provincia de San Vicente de Chiapa y Guatemala."
(Fragmentary.)

FRANCISCO HERNANDEZ, CACIQUE OF SOLOLA. (FRANCISCO ERNANDEZ ARANA
XAHILA.) "Memorial," written about 1582.--Original owned by Brasseur
de Bourbourg, who quotes it under the heading of "Memorial de
Tec-Pan-Atitlan."--It is one of the most important and valuable
documents existing on aboriginal topics,--embodying, as it does, a
statement of the conquest of Guatemala, written by a native in his own
language.

"Documentos antiguos de la casa de Ixcuinte-Nehaib."

In addition to these, I must lay particular stress on the "territorial
titles" land grants, cessions, leases, or deeds to lands, still held
in Guatemala,--or to whatever (if anything) may be left of their
records.--Such papers contain frequently interesting, if not important
references to antiquities, traditions and historical facts, also to
the customs and manners of the Indians.

Among the other authorities still perhaps existing, or known to have
existed, though of difficult access, I refer to those below, avoiding,
of course, Linguistical works, unless they are of direct bearing on
other subjects also.

JUAN ESTRADA DE RAVAGO (or Juan Strada Salvago.) "Descripcion de las
Provincias de Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua y
Tierra-firme y Cartagena, &c., &c." 6 May, 1572. (MS. copy of it
belonging to E. G. Squier.)

"Memorial de las advertencias i cosas que la C. Cath, R'l M. del Rey i
su Re. Consejo de Indias manda hacer, &c., &c." (MS. of E. G. Squier.)
1579.

FRANCISCO MONTERO DE MIRANDA. "Relacion dirigida al Ill'mo Senor
Palacio, &c., &c., sobre la provincia de la Verapaz o Tierra de
Guerra." 1575. (MS. of E. G. Squier.)

FRAYLES: FRANCISCO VIANA, LUCAS GALLEGO, and GUILLERMO CADENA.
"Relacion de la provincia y tierra de la Vera Paz," 1574. (MS. of
Squier.)

FRAY TOMAS CARDENAS. "Representaciones al Rey sobre el Estado de los
Pueblos de la Vera-Paz."

FRAY TOMAS CASTELAR. "Tratado de los Idolos de Guatemala."

"Triunfos de los Martires del Orden de Predicadores en las Indias."
Printed 1580.

FRAY TOMAS TORRE. "Historia de los principios de la Provincia de
Chiapas y Guatemala, del Orden de Santo Domingo."--Written prior to
1567.

FRAY DOMINGO VICO. "Historia de los Indios, sus Fabulas,
Supersticiones, Costumbres, &c."

"Teologia para los Indios, en Lengua de Vera Paz." 4 vols. (Still
existing.)

GERONIMO ROMAN. "Republica Indiana." (See Yucatan.)

This list is certainly far from complete, and it may be that among the
vocabularies, grammars, and such works now lost, although we know of
their former existence, there were some,--perhaps even many,--which
contained historical and ethnological matter of great value.--It is
hardly possible to avoid all allusions to such subjects in any work on
linguistics. But the number of books of that class is too great for
the purpose of the present list.


_Writers of the Seventeenth Century._

AUGUSTIN DAVILA-PADILLA. (See Yucatan. First edition appeared in
1595.)

GREGORIO GARCIA. (Plain and well informed, though brief.)

JUAN DE TORQUEMADA. (Important on organization and government, also
myths.)

ANTONIO DE HERRERA. (Very full and important.)

ANTONIO DE REMESAL. (Not as full on antiquities as might be expected.)

AUGUSTIN DE VETANCOURT. (Very slight mention.)

ENRICO MARTINEZ. (Casual mention.)

GIL GONZALEZ DAVILA.

JUAN DIEZ DE LA CALLE.


FERNANDO DE ALBA IXTLILXOCHITL. "Relaciones historicas."--Of these,
the thirteenth, "De la Venida de los Espanoles," is of particular
interest for Guatemala,--since it relates in detail Cortes' trip to
Honduras. The "Relaciones" are printed in full in Vol. IX. of Lord
Kingsborough's Collection,--the 13th however, was published under the
title of "Horribles Crueldades de los Conquistadores de Mexico," as
appendix to Sahagun's "Hist-general," Vol. III., in 1829. From this,
M. Ternaux made a French translation, published by him in 1838, as
"Cruautes horribles des Conquerants du Mexique,"--in the first series
of his "Voyages et Memoires originaux, &c."

"Historia de los Chichimecos, o' reyes antiguos de Tezcuco."--Casual
mention of Guatemala.--Published in Kingsborough, Vol. IX., and
translated by Ternaux and printed in French as "Histoire des
Chichimeques ou des anciens rois de Tezcuco," in 1840.--(2d
Series.)--Besides these, there are found references to Guatemala in
the "Sumaria Relacion, de los Toltecas." (Kingsb. IX.)--Ixtlilxochitl,
though full of details, is always a very suspicious source.--He is the
representative of _one tribe exclusively_.


FRANCISCO ANTONIO FUENTES Y GUZMAN. "Recordacion florida; Discurso
historico, natural, material, militar, y politico del reyno de
Guatemala." MS. of 1690. Original in the municipal archives of the
city of Guatemala. Copy at the "Museo Nacional."--Fuentes is like
Ixtlilxochitl--both have the same tendency to extol their native
tribes--still both must be carefully studied and critically
examined.--A publication of Fuentes, well and judiciously annotated,
would be highly useful.


FERNANDO ESPINO. "Historia de la reduccion y conversion de la
Provincia de Taguzgalpa, con la Vida de los tres Martires."--Printed
at Guatemala, 1674.--Whether and where it still exists I do not know.


LIONEL WAFER. "A new Voyage and description of the Isthmus of
America."--London, 1699.


FRAY THOMAS GAGE. "New survey of the West Indies." (A work which is
looked upon with great suspicion, because the author, although he
evidently went to Guatemala from Mexico, misrepresents a great many
facts. Still he cannot be overlooked.)--This book appeared first prior
to 1676.--Robertson quotes an English edition of 1677, and that of
1699 is the fourth edition. There are French editions of 1676, 1694-5,
1699 1720, 1721. Dutch of 1682, 1700. German of 1693. Spanish,
1838.--Yet this list is evidently still incomplete, as further
material is out of my reach.


ANTONIO DE LEON Y PINELO. "Tratado de Confirmaciones Reales de
Encomiendas, Oficios, y casos en que se requieren para las Indias
Occidentales." Madrid, 1630.--This work is one of the best on many
vital points of Spanish administration,--and since the latter is so
intimately connected with the past and present condition of the
aborigines as to make its knowledge absolutely necessary,--it must be
attentively studied.--I shall, for this reason, add below the books of
Solorzano:

"Epitome de la Biblioteca Oriental i Occidental, Nautica y
Geografica." Madrid, 1629. 2d Edition, by Barcia, 1737 and 1738.
(Important bibliographically.)

"Relacion que en el Consejo Real de las Indias hizo el Licenciado ...,
sobre la Pacificacion de las Provincias del Manche y Lacandon," 1639.
MS. of E. G. Squier.


JUAN DE SOLORZANO-PEREYRA. "Disputationem de Indiarum jure, sive de
mixta Indiarum Occidentalium inquisitione, acquisitione, et retentione
tribus libris compehensam." (This is the title of the first volume
only, the second volume bears the heading "De Indiarum gubernatione,
&c.") Madrid, 1629-1639.--2d edition, 1672.

"Politica Indiana." Madrid, 1648.--Subsequent editions, 1703, 1736-39,
1776.

The latter work is but a Spanish transcription or version of the
first. The importance of both is in their clear "expose" of the
principles of right and law, according to which the Spanish Indies
were governed.--We are thereby enabled to judge of the true relations
existing between the conquering and conquered races, and to detect,
how far the original condition of the latter was understood or
misunderstood by the former--(and misrepresented?)

       *       *       *       *       *

The "Museo Nacional," at Guatemala, has the following manuscripts
besides those already mentioned:

"Historia de la Provincia de Predicadores de San Vicente de Chiapa y
Guatemala."--A fragment, possibly by _Fray Augustin Cano_.

"Solicitud que el Padre Fray Augustin Cano hizo al Ill'mo S^r Obispo
de Guatemala ... que se hallaba de visita en el pueblo de Cajabon
pidiendo amparo para reducir a los indios Choles."

"Informe dado al Rey por el _Padre Fray Augustin Cano_ sobre la
entrada que por la parte de la Verapaz se hizo al Peten en 1695."

"Suma de los Capitulos generales y principales, ordenaciones, &c., de
la Provincia de Predicadores de Chiapa y Guatemala." by _Fray Lope de
Montoya_.

"Vidas de varios Padres de la Provincia de Chiapa y Guatemala del
Orden de Indicadores," by _Fray Antonio de Molina_.

Whether the "Noticia o Relacion de los Padres de la Orden de
Predicadores que florecian en la Provincia de los Zoques" (anonymous
MS.), belongs to the 17th century, I am unable to say.

       *       *       *       *       *

Notice of the following books or writings has been communicated to me
from various sources:

FRAY ANTONIO AROCHENA. "Catalogo y noticia de los Escritores del Orden
de San Francisco de la Provincia de Guatemala." (A very important
bibliographical composition, to judge from its plan.)

FRAY ESTEVAN AVILES. "Historia de Guatemala desde los tiempos de los
Indios, hasta la fundacion de la provincia de los franciscanos;
poblacion de aquellas tierras, propagacion de los Indios, sus ritos,
ceremonias, policia, y Gobierno." (Said to have been printed at
Guatemala in 1663.)

FRAY SALVADOR CIPRIANA. "Libro de los Idolos de la Provincia de
Zacatula."

"Hechos de los Padres Fray Levis Cancer, Fray Bartolome de las Casas,
y Fray Pedro de Angulo, en la predicacion del Evangelio."

"Historia de la Entrada de los Espanoles en Zacatula."

NICOLAS LIZARRAGA. (See Yucatan.)

FRAY MELCHOR DE JESUS LOPEZ. "Relacion de la Conversion a la Fe de los
Indios de Salamanca." 1690.

"Relacion de la Pacificacion de los Indios de Vera-Paz."

FRAY PEDRO SOTOMAYOR. "Informacion de los Varones Ilustres del Orden
de San Francisco del Reino de Guatemala."

DIEGO DE UNZUETA. "Relacion de Guatemala,"--handed to Juan Diez de la
Calle in 1648.

NICOLAS DE VALENZUELA. (Wrote about the expedition against
Lacandon,--in 1695.)

FRAY ESTEVAN VERDELETE. "Noticias de la Provincia de Teguzigalpa."
(Written between 1593 and 1612.)

JUAN ZAPATA Y SANDOVAL. (See Chiapas.)

FRAY PEDRO DAZA. "Memorias historicas de la fundacion y predicacion de
los Religiosos de la Merced de la Redencion de cautivos en Guatemala."

FRAY JOSE MORERA. "Noticias de la Provincia de Guatemala, con un
Tratado de la Mision y Martirio de los P. P. Misioneros, Verdelete y
Montragudo." (MS. said to be at Guatemala.)

FRAY PABLO REBULLIDA. "Informe a la Audiencia de Guatemala sobre el
estado actual de la Cristiandad de la Provincia de Talamanca." 1697.

"Cartas sobre el caracter de los Indios Terrabas, Talamancas, y
Changenes."

FRAY PEDRO DE URTIAGA. "Diario del Viaje de los cinco Misioneros desde
Queretaro hasta Guatemala."--Printed in 1694, at Guatemala.

ALONZO DUARTE. "Relacion de lo que Yo (A. D.) vecino desta ciudad de
Santiago de Guatemala entendi y vide quando D. Francisco Valverde
vino a sondar el puerto de Cavallos." 1605. MS. pertaining to E. G.
Squier.

These are certainly not all,--perhaps only a minority of the documents
relating to Guatemala,--which originated during the 17th century. In
regard to the ruins of Copan,--Fuentes is perhaps (because a number of
the last enumerated authors I have not seen) the only one who mentions
its ruins, and even gives an enthusiastic description of them,--but
Torquemada as well as Herrera relates the tradition of Comizahual,
which also relates to Copan. The latter place is, besides, commonly
regarded as belonging properly to _Honduras, and only of late has been
added_ to Guatemala. I add the following, although they are of
scarcely any value for the purpose in view:


JOSE MONROY. "Estado del Convento de Guatemala, del Orden de nuestra
Senora de la Merced." Printed, 1667.

DIEGO RODRIGUEZ DE RIBAS. "Disertacion canonica sobre los justos
motivos que representa el Reyno de Guatemala, para que el Consejo se
serva de erigir en Metropoli ecclesiastica la S. Iglesia Catedral,
&c." Printed, 1660.


_Writers of the Eighteenth Century._

ANTONIO DE ALCEDO.

F. X. CLAVIGERO. (Very slight mention.)

The following MSS. are yet at Guatemala "Museo Nacional."

PEDRO CORTES Y LARRAZ. "Descripcion geografico moral de la Diocesis de
Guatemala." 1768-69.

FRAY FRANCISCO XIMENEZ. "Historia de la Provincia de San Vicente de
Chiapa y Guatemala de la Orden de los Predicadores." 5 vols.

JOSE SANCHEZ. "Apuntaciones para la Historia de Guatemala."

FERNANDO VELASQUEZ DE GUZMAN. "Relacion de los Obispos de Guatemala."

There is, besides, a MS.:

"Efemerides de Guatemala desde su fundacion hasta la ruina de
1773."--Anonymous.

Printed works:

FRAY ISIDRO FELIX DE ESPINOSA. "El Peregrino Septentrional Atlante."
(Life of Fray Antonio Margil.) Mexico, 1737.

FRAY CARLOS CADENA. "Breve descripcion de la Noble Ciudad de Santiago
de los Caballaros de Guatemala, &c." Mexico, 1774.--2d Edition,
Guatemala, 1858.


JUAN DE VILLAGUTIERRE Y SOTOMAYOR. (On Vera Paz.)

FRANCISCO NUNEZ DE LA VEGA. (On Chiapas.)


TORIBIO COSIO. (In the University Library of Mexico.)

FRAY JOSE DIEZ. "Noticia de las Misiones de Guatemala."

FRAY ILDEFONSO JOSEPH FLORES. "Teologia de los Indios."

FRAY FRANCISCO VASQUEZ. (See Chiapas.)

FRAY FRANCISCO XIMENEZ. (See Chiapas.)

It is said that Ximenez wrote two large historical works, one in five
volumes, of which but three were finished.--This is a mistake, the
entire edition of five volumes is still at Guatemala. The other work,
secured by Dr. Scherzer, bears the title "Las Historias del Origen de
los Indios de esta Provincia de Guatemala....," and published by him
at Vienna in 1857. (Anonymous MS. said to exist at Guatemala.)

"Informe del Provincial de la Orden de Santo Domingo Guatemala,
tocante a los negocios de la Vera-Paz." 1724.

"Relacion de la Sublevacion de los Zendales." 1712.


ANTONIO RODRIGUEZ CAMPAS. "Diario Historico de Guatemala."

FRAY JUAN CARTAJENA. "La S^{ta} Iglesia de Guatemala, madre
fecundisima de hijos ilustrissimos." Mexico, 1747.

RAMON ORDONEZ Y AGUIAR. (See Chiapas.) At Mexico.

(A number of the above works may be lost.)


_Writers of the Nineteenth Century._

All general works, archaeological, historical, and geographical, are
left out. I even omit, as abundantly known, Kingsborough, Bancroft,
Baldwin, Short, the "Antiquites Mexicaines," the "Cites et Ruines
Mexicaines" of Waldeck,--Brasseur de Bourbourg, &c., &c.--Reference to
these sources is self-understood.

DOMINGO JUARREZ. "Compendio de la Historia de Guatemala." 1808-1818,
Guatemala. (Relies too much on Fuentes.) English translation by
Bailey. London, 1823. "A statistical and Commercial History of the
Kingdom of Guatemala, in Spanish America."--A second Spanish edition
appeared in 1857.


FRANCISCO DE PAULA GARCIA PELAEZ. (See Chiapas.).

"Memorias para la Historia del Antiguo Reyno de Guatemala." 1852.


CHARLES ETIENNE BRASSEUR DE BOURBOURG. "Popol Vuh. Le livre Sacre et
les Mythes de l'Antiquite Americaine, avec les livres Heroiques et
Historiques des Quiches." Paris, 1861.

Hardly any work of this century has created such a "mixed" sensation
of a serious nature, as this book.--It could be seen at a glance, that
no mystification was possible,--but there was a wide field open for
discussion on the point of origin, as far as the document itself, the
"Popol Vuh," was concerned.--Still the "sensation" has not resulted in
much active critical examination, and I think (If I may be permitted
to commit such a breach of modesty,) myself the only person attempting
a criticism of the "Popol Vuh" on the basis of documentary evidence.
Unfortunately, I was unable to prepare my annotations in time for the
publication of the 27th Volume of Proceedings of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science, in 1878.--Thus only the
text of "Sources for aboriginal history of Spanish America," appeared
without any documentary evidence attached.

One thing is evident, that the "Popol Vuh" was _written_. Now it is a
fact very easily proven, that the aborigines of Guatemala had no
phonetic alphabet whatever, consequently _that they did not
write_.--Therefore the "Popol Vuh" must have been composed, as an
instrument in writing, since the conquest; or after 1524.--This is
developed utterly independent of the fact that the document hints at
two data (p. 343,) indicating the time of its composition to have been
after 1550, and prior to 1600.--Therefore it was written in our
letters, or perhaps with the aid of the "five characters" invented by
Fray Francisco de la Parra, previous to 1560, to indicate sounds for
which our alphabet had no signs.--At all events, it was written in the
native Quiche idiom, and was only met with incidentally by Fray
Francisco Ximenez at the town of Chichicastenango, towards the close
of the 17th century.--This Dominican monk translated it into the
Spanish language and incorporated both text and translation in the
first volume of his "Historia de la provincia de predicadores,
&c."--according to Brasseur de Bourbourg's really silly and
irritatingly confused bibliography--(p. XIII., "Notice Bibliographique.")
Dr. Scherzer certainly deserves credit for having published a Spanish
text rendering approximatively the "Popol Vuh," in 1857, and there is no
doubt but that it is as correct a rendering of the original Quiche as the
French translation of Brasseur de Bourbourg.

The filiation of the text being thus established as far back as 1550
to 1600, it remains to investigate the question: how much of it was
originally Indian;--if all of it or not? There is no doubt but that
the greater part of it is Indian songs, preserved for centuries, and
Indian myths and tales--historical traditions--which were recorded by
the compiler in the form now before us. But this compiler, or
rather--recorder--has given to these tales a chronological
sequence,--at least in the first part,--which may hereafter prove
conjectural.--Actions are made to succeed to each other, which may yet
prove to be without any connection at all.--I do not insist upon this
point--since a new translation of the "Popol Vuh" should precede its
investigation--but I particularly insist upon a careful and critical
study of its first so-called "Chapters."

These first chapters give us cosmological Ideas and Notions,
purporting to be originally Indian, which, at their very inception,
show a singular admixture of foreign elements. The first sentences
appear to be transcriptions from the book of Genesis. They are not
aboriginally American.--We are therefore led to investigate whether,
prior to 1550, European influences could have been brought to bear
upon the recollection and the imagination of the natives.--There is
very positive evidence to that effect.--The monks, at the earliest
stages of conversion, used paintings of their own, to impress upon the
natives the notions of a creation of the world, of the deluge and
salvation of a single pair therefrom, &c., &c.--The Dominican Father
Gonzalo Lucero travelled about with painted charts representing such
striking events, which he displayed in confirmation of his teachings.
Fray Jacobo Testera (he died Aug. 8, 1543) used similar means. Fray
Pedro de Angulo, who went with Las Casas to Guatemala and was made
Provincial of Chiapas in 1561, wrote three dissertations in the
Zutuhil language, one on the Creation of the World, one on Adam's
Fall, and one on the Expulsion of our first fathers from
Paradise.--Fray Luis Cancer wrote similar pages in the language of
Oajaca, previous to 1546.--Fray Domingo Vico, who was killed by the
Indians of Lacandon, in 1555, wrote his "Teologia para los Indios," in
the Quiche language, also a dissertation on the "Eternal Paradise," in
the language of Vera-Paz.--But there is also indisputable proof that
_songs were composed on the subject of the creation of the world_ and
other parts of the Hebrew Genesis, in the Quiche language, which songs
were used as the means of conversion of the natives of Vera-Paz in
1537. (Remesal. Lib. III., Cap. XI., p. 124.) They had been composed
by Las Casas, Fray Rodrigo de Ladrada, Fray Pedro de Angulo, and
probably Fray Luis Cancer. Many other similar ones were composed
afterwards.

Thus we see that, prior to 1550, ecclesiastics had commenced to write
upon cosmological subjects with our letters and in the languages of
Guatemala, and that, on the other hand, Christian cosmogony had become
a text for Indian songs. The "Popol Vuh" has therefore nothing
extraordinary in its origin; it is but a child of its time, like the
"Memorial de Tecpan-Atitlan," by the Chief of Solola, only
anonymous,--and preceded by a cosmological introduction made up of
Christian and Indian tales confusedly intermingled, and therefore
apocryphal so far. These criticisms, however, apply merely to the
"first part,"--the rest of the "Popol Vuh" appears to be original, and
therefore of the greatest value. This however cannot be said of the
translation, only of the MS. A new translation, supervised by a
native, should be obtained at any price.

"Grammaire Quichee, et le Drame Rabinal-Ache." Paris, 1862.

Of the "Rabinal-Ache," a new translation is absolutely requisite. Mr.
Brasseur, like all translators of Indian songs, has so disfigured it
by the introduction of a foreign terminology, as to render it useless
for any one who has no access to vocabularies, &c.


JOHN L. STEPHENS. (See Yucatan), also FREDERICK CATHERWOOD.


JUAN GALINDO. (See Yucatan and Chiapas.)

What I have seen of his reports has left upon my mind the impression
that he means to be truthful, but in his zeal and eagerness saw "too
big," and again "too often."

"The Ruins of Copan in Central America." Transactions of the American
Antiquarian Society, Vol. II., pp. 545-550. 1836.

"Notions sur Palenque," &c., &c., "transmises a la Societe
geographique de France," in "Antiquites mexicaines," Vol. I., pp.
73-76.--Published also in the "Bulletin" of the French Geographical
Society, and in the "Literary Gazette" of London.


E. G. SQUIER. "The Serpent-Symbol, and the Worship of the Reciprocal
Principles of Nature in America." N. York, 1851.

"The States of Central America: their Geography, Topography, &c., &c.
Aborigines," N. York, 1858.

"Notes on Central America, particularly the States of Honduras and San
Salvador." N. York, 1855.--German translation, Leipzig, 1856.--French
version, Paris, 1855.--Spanish, Paris, 1856, (two different
translations.)

"Honduras, Descriptive, Historical and Statistical." London, 1870.

"Honduras and Guatemala." "The National Intelligencer." N. York, 1854.

"The Ruins of Tenampua." Although in Honduras, they appear
traditionally connected with Copan. N. York, 1853, in "Proceedings of
the Historical Society of New York."

"Monograph of Authors who have Written on the Languages of Central
America." Albany, 1861.--A very valuable and important contribution to
bibliography.

       *       *       *       *       *

CARL SCHERZER. "Wanderungen durch die mittel-amerikanischen
Freistaaten." Braunschweig, 1857.--English version, London, 1857.

"Narrative of the Circumnavigation of the Globe by the Austrian
frigate Novara." London, 1861. (The official reports on the results of
the circumnavigation, &c., are very rare.)

"Die Indianer von Ixtlahuacan." Vienna, 1856.

"Ein Besuch bei den Ruinen von Quirigua." Vienna, 1855.

I omit here his linguistical writings, and his publication of the
"Historia del Origen de los Indios, &c.," in 1857.--See Ximenez.


MORITZ WAGNER, AND CARL SCHERZER. "Die Republik Costa-Rica in Central
Amerika." Leipzig, 1857.--Describes the ruins of Quirigua.


MANUEL GALVAN RIVERA. "Historia de Mexico, Guatemala, Estados-Unidos
del Norte, Peru, &c." Mexico, 1852.


"GACETA DE GUATEMALA." (From 1797.) Contains interesting notices,
historical and ethnological.


"PERIODICO DE LA SOCIEDAD ECONOMICA DE GUATEMALA." (Only 24 numbers
published in 1815 and 1816.) 1 May, 1815, to 15 April, 1816.


THE PADRES: CHICA, ABELLA, AND ESCOTO, AND AGUILAR. "Informes, al
Ill'mo Senor Arzobispo de Guatemala, tocantes a la Vera-Paz." 1819 and
1820. MSS.

DOMINGUEZ DE MAZARIEGOS. (See Chiapas.)

DOMINGO FAJARDO. "Informe dirigido al Gobierno Supremo de Mexico,
relativo a su Mision a Vera-Paz y Peten." Campeche, 1828.

ORLANDO N. ROBERTS. "Narrative of Voyages and Excursions on the East
Coast and in the Interior of Central America." Edinburgh, 1827.


CARL HERMANN BERENDT. "Report of Explorations in Central America."
Smithsonian Report, 1867.

"Collection of historical documents on Guatemala." Smithsonian Report,
1876.

"Die Indianer des Isthmus von Tehuantepec."--Zeitschrift fuer
Ethnologie. Berlin, 1873, Vol. V.

"_Analytical Alphabet_ for the Mexican and Central American
Languages." Published by the American Ethnological Society. New York,
1869.

"_Cartilla en Lengua Maya_ para la ensenanza de los ninos indigenes."
Merida, 1871.

_El Ramie._ Tratado sobre el cultivo y algunas noticias de esta
planta. Merida de Yucatan, 1871. (Ed. de la Revista de Merida.)

_Los Escritos de D. Joaquin Garcia Icazbalceta._ Ed. de la Revista de
Merida. Tomo II., 1870.

"_Articulo sobre El Mexico_," se halla en el "Deutsch Amerikanisches
Conversations Lexicon, barbeitet von. Prof. Alex. I. Schem. Lieferung
64, Band VII., Seite 261, pp. 27. (N. Y. 1872.)

"_Remarks on the Centres of Ancient Civilization in Central America_,
and their Geograpical Distribution." Address read before the Am.
Geogr. Society, N. Y., July 10th, 1876, with map.

_Zur Ethnologie von Nicaragua._ Articulo publicado en
Correspondenz-Blatt der deutschen Gesellschaft fuer Anthropologie,
Ethnologie und Urgeschichte. Redigirt von N. A. v. Frantzius in
Heidelberg, No. 9, September, 1874.

In "Geographische Mittheilungen" von A. Petermann, Gotha.

(The above makes no pretension to be a full list of the eminent
linguist's publications.)


ALEXANDER VON FRANTZIUS. (See Palacio.)

"San Salvador and Honduras im Iahre, 1847."--Annotated also by
Berendt.


GUSTAV BERNOULLI. "Reisen in der Republik Guatemala."--In "Petermann's
Mittheilungen," 1874-75.


BARON DER THEIL. "Le Guatemala." In "l'Explorateur," Vol. III. 1876.


J. LAFERRIER. "De Paris au Guatemala." Paris, 1877.


GEORGE WILLIAMSON. "Antiquities in Guatemala." Smithsonian Reports,
1876. (Very interesting and of great value for archaeological studies.)


J. W. BODDAM-WETHAM. "Across Central America." London, 1877.


ADOLPH BASTIAN. "Die Monumenta in Santa Lucia
Cozumalguapa."--"Zeitschrift fuer Ethnologie," 1876.

"Die Culturlaender des alten Amerikas." (See Yucatan.)


GUSTAV BRUHL. (See Yucatan.)


H. W. BATES. "Central America, West Indies, and South America."
London, 1878.


A. BONCARD. "Le Guatemala."--In "L'explorateur," 1878. No. 23.


FRANCISCO PIMENTEL. (See Yucatan and Chiapas.)

MANUEL OROZCO Y BERRA. (See Yucatan, &c.)


S. HABEL. "The Sculptures of Santa Lucia Cozumalguapa."--Smithsonian
Contributions, No. 269.--Washington, 1878.

In closing this list, I must again distinctly state, that it is very
imperfect,--and that no one acquainted with the literature of Central
America can fail to notice many omissions.--But I had neither time,
nor opportunity to do better, owing to the state of my health. In
conclusion, I wish to advert to a few books of an exclusively
bibliographical tenor, which every student of American history must at
least attempt to consult.--Some of them are, unfortunately, extremely
rare:

NICOLAS ANTONIO. "Bibliotheca Hispana Nova, &c." 1st edition, Rome,
1672. 2d edition, Madrid, 1733-38.

JUAN JOSE DE EGUIARA Y EGUREN. "Biblioteca Mexicana." Mexico, 1755.
Incomplete: only the first volume published.

ANTONIO DE ALCEDO. "Biblioteca americana." MS. Original belonged to
Mr. Jared Sparks. Mexico, 1807.

J. MARIANO BERISTAIN DE SOUZA. "Biblioteca Hispana Americana.
Septentrional." Mexico, 1816 and 1819, 3 volumes. (Exceedingly rare.)

BRASSEUR DE BOURBOURG. "Bibliotheque mexico-guatemalienne." Paris,
1871.

       *       *       *       *       *

I forbear quoting here at length the bibliographical works of
Harrisse, Rich, Ludewig, Ternaux-Compans, Sabin, and others.--They are
deservedly well known, and of easy access to any student.




OAJACA. ("Huaxyacac.")


_Writers of the Sixteenth Century._

HERNAN CORTES. (2d letter.)

BERNAL DIEZ DEL CASTILLO. (Casual notice.)

FRANCISCO LOPEZ DE GOMARA. ("Conquista de Mexico.")


FRAY TORIBIO DE PARADES, SURNAMED MOTOLINIA. ("Historia de los Indios
de la Nueva-Espana." See bibliography of Yucatan.)--This is probably
the earliest mention of the ruins of Mitla, which were, however,
inhabited at that time. Motolinia has been entirely overlooked by
Bancroft, although his description of Mitla is truly excellent.


GONZALO FERNANDEZ DE OVIEDO Y VALDES. (Casual notice.)


CODEX CHIMALPOPOCA. Now in process of publication, in the "Anales del
Museo Nacional de Mexico." Vol. II., by Mendoza, Sanchez Solis, and
Chavero.


JUAN DE TOBAR. "Codice Ramirez,"--published by S^r J. M. Vigil, as an
anonymous chronicle, in 1878. Also "Historia de los Indios Mexicanos."
Original in possession of the Estate of Sir Thomas Phillips, at
Cheltenham, England. Copy of a fragment, privately printed, at the
Lenox Library, New York. (Written between 1579 and 1589.)


DIEGO DURAN. "Historia de las Indias de Nueva-Espana, e Yslas de
Tierra firme."--(Written between 1579 and 1581, but only the first
part of it printed, at Mexico, 1867, by S^r Jose F^r Ramirez.)--Very
important; mentions again Mitla as a settlement inhabited about 1450.
"Apendice" por Alfredo Chavaro, Mexico, 1880.


FERNANDO DE ALVARADO TEZOZOMOC. "Cronica mexicana."--Written 1598.
Printed for the first time in Vol. IX. of Kingsborough, and again
(though not complete) in the "Biblioteca mexicana" of S^r Vigil, with
notes by S^r Orozco y Berra.--A French translation has been made by
Ternaux-Compans, under the title of "Histoire du Mexique, par Alvarado
Tezozomoc," Paris, 1853, 2 vols. It is utterly unreliable.


FRAY GERONIMO DE MENDIETA. (Copies textually from Motolinia.)


FRAY BERNARDINO SAHAGUN. "Historia universal de las Cosas de
Nueva-Espana," in Vols. 6 and 8 of Kingsborough.--The same book, under
the title of "Historia general, &c., &c." appeared at Mexico, in 3
vols., 1829, edited by C. M. de Bustamante. Only very slight and
casual mention of Oajaca.


_Writers of the Seventeenth Century._

AUGUSTIN DAVILA-PADILLA.

JUAN DE TORQUEMADA. (Important.)

ANTONIO DE HERRERA. (Important.)

GREGORIO GARCIA. (Important.)

FRANCISCO DE BURGOA. "Palestra Historiale de Virtudes y Exemplares
Apostolicos." Mexico, 1670.

"Geografica Descripcion de la Parte Septentrional del Polo Artico de
la America." Mexico, 1674. This work is regarded (especially by such
as have not seen it), as the leading work on Oajaca.--I have never
even seen it--it is exceedingly rare.


_Writers of the Eighteenth Century._

MARIANO VEYTIA.

F. X. CLAVIGERO.

ANTONIO DE ALCEDO.

LORENZO BOTURINI BERNADUCCI.


JOSEPH JOAQUIN GRANADOS Y GALVEZ. "Tardes americanas." Mexico, 1778--A
work considerably over-estimated,--containing casual mention of
Oajaca,--fluently written.


_Writers of the Nineteenth Century._

I forbear mentioning here _all_ the writers on Oajaca,--more
particularly avoiding all the general works,--those excepted which
contain plates of special value. The first who called attention to
Mitla was certainly

ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT. "Vues des Cordilleres et monuments des peuples
indigenes de l'Amerique." Paris, 1810. Royal folio.--Same, 2 vols. 8^o
Paris, 1816. English version, by Helen M. Williams, London, 1814.

"Essai politique sur la Nouvelle-Espagne." (See "Yucatan.")


MATHIEU DE FOSSEY. "Le Mexique." Paris, 1857.--Very fair.


EDUARD MUHLENPFORDT. "Versuch einer getreuen Schilderung der Republik
Mejico." Hannover, 1844. 2 vols.


ARTHUR VON TEMPSKY. "Mitla, a Narrative of Incidents and Personal
Adventures." London, 1858.--Of small scientific value.


GUILLERMO DUPAIX, AND CASTANEDA. (In "Antiquites Mexicaines," also in
Lord Kingsborough's "Antiquities of Mexico.")


DESIRE CHARNAY. (Saw the ruins in 1859. His photographs are very
important.)

JOSE MARIA GARCIA. (Visited Mitla in 1855, according to "Boletin de la
Sociedad Mexicana de Geografia y Estadistica." Vol. VII., pp. 271 and
272.)

BRANTZ-MAYER. "Mexico as it Was and as it Is." New York, 1844. Very
fair.

"Mexico, Aztec, Spanish and Republican." Hartford, 1853. Very good.

"Observations on Mexican History and Archaeology." (Smithsonian
Contributions. No. 86, Washington, 1856.) Contains Sawkins' drawings
of Mitla.


J. W. VON MUeLLER. "Beitrage zur Geschichte und Ethnographie von
Mexico." Leipzig, 1865.

"Reisen in den Vereinigten-Staaten, Canada, and Mexico." Leipzig,
1864.


CARLOS MARIA DE BUSTAMANTE. "Memoria estadistica de Oajaca, y
descripcion del Valle del mismo nombre." Vera-Cruz, 1821.


MURGUIA. "Estadistica antigua y moderna de la Provincia de Guajaca."
"Boletin, &c." Vol. II.

JUAN B. CARRIEDO. The writings of this author are, unfortunately, but
little known.--In the "Ilustracion Mexicana," Vol. II., he has given
an essay on "Los Palacios Antiguos de Mitla."--But he has published
other papers and even books on the same subject.

"Estudios historicos, y estadisticos del estado Oaxaqueno." Oajaca,
1850.

The Astor Library of New York has an incomplete copy of a work of
Carriedo on Oajaca, with colored drawings by him,--unfinished. Copious
notes by the author's own hand accompany the text. In historical
questions Carriedo mostly follows and cites Burgoa.


FRANCISCO PIMENTEL. "Cuadro descriptivo de las Lenguas Indigenas de
Mexico." (See Yucatan and Chiapas.)


MANUEL OROZCO Y BERRA. In "Geografia de las Lenguas."--Reference is
made to a number of very important papers on Oajaca, the title of one,
among others, "Estado que comprende el numero de Parroquias de la
Diocesis de Oajaca, con expresion de sus nombres, Estado o Territorio
en que estan situadas, numero de pueblos, &c., &c."

Further, certain official reports are quoted,--the originals of which
are in the hands of my friend S^r J. G. Icazbalceta,--S^r Orozco
mentions the following:

PEDRO DE LEDESMA. "Relacion de Oajaca, por el alcalde...." 1579.

HERNANDO DE CERVANTES. "Relacion de Teotzacualco y Amoltepec...."
1580.

AUGUSTIN DE SALAZAR. "Relacion del vicario de Chilapa."

JUAN LOPEZ. "Relacion del Corregidor...." 1579.

Finally, I must call attention to a linguistical work, known to me
only through S^r Orozco y Berra's citation, and through references
given by S^r Pimentel--to wit:

ANTONIO DE LOS REYES. "Arte en lengua mixteca." Mexico, 1593.

Numerous grammars, vocabularies, "doctrinas," sermonaries, &c., &c.,
were written in the course of the 16th century, of and in the language
of Oajaca.


EMILIO HERBRUeGER. "Album de vistas fotograficas de las antiguas Ruinas
de los Palacios de Mitla." Oaxaca, 1875. Text and valuable
photographs.

       *       *       *       *       *

In conclusion, I would merely beg to add,--that there can hardly be
any doubt as to the fact that Mitla was _inhabited_ when the Spaniards
first visited the place. It therefore becomes a point of special
interest.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes on the Bibliography of Yucatan
and Central America, by Adolph Francis Bandelier

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES ON BIBLIOGRAPHY OF YUCATAN ***

***** This file should be named 40728.txt or 40728.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/7/2/40728/

Produced by Julia Miller, Katie Hernandez and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
