The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Nursery, May 1881, Vol. XXIX, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Nursery, May 1881, Vol. XXIX
       A Monthly Magazine for Youngest Readers

Author: Various

Release Date: September 14, 2012 [EBook #40756]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NURSERY, MAY 1881, VOL. XXIX ***




Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net Music
transcribed by June Troyer.










THE

NURSERY

_A Monthly Magazine_

FOR YOUNGEST READERS.

VOLUME XXIX.--No. 5.

    BOSTON:
    THE NURSERY PUBLISHING COMPANY,
    NO. 36 BROMFIELD STREET.
    1881.




    Entered according to act of Congress, in the year 1881, by
    THE NURSERY PUBLISHING COMPANY,
    In the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington.


[Illustration: JOHN WILSON

& SON.

UNIVERSITY PRESS.]



[Illustration: Contents.]

IN PROSE.


                                                 PAGE
    The Bold Soldier-Boys                         129
    Papa Robin                                    132
    Carlo and the Ducks                           135
    Picking Oranges                               139
    Mary and Jenny                                144
    Drawing-Lesson                                145
    Piggy's Spoon                                 146
    Bouncer                                       148
    Harry and John                                154
    "Inches"                                      155


IN VERSE.

                                                 PAGE
    The Army of Geese that Came over the Lea      131
    The Naughty Cat                               136
    The May-Queen                                 141
    Sing, Pretty Birds                            143
    The Traveller                                 147
    The Mouse-Trap                                151
    One Cat and Two Pigs                          152
    Small Beginning                               157
    Jenny Wren                                    159
    Daddy Frog (_with music_)                     160



[Illustration: VOL. XXIX.--NO. 5.]




THE BOLD SOLDIER-BOYS.


"FORWARD, my brave boys!" shouted Colonel Bob, rising in his stirrups,
and waving his sword. "You see the enemy before you. Charge!"

There stood the enemy in stern defiance,--four chairs, one table, and a
sofa,--there they stood, with a plastered wall in their rear, and calmly
awaited the attack.

The fiery steed of Colonel Bob reared and plunged, as if eager to dash
upon the foe. The roll of the drum made a fearful sound. The
standard-bearer waved his flag. The army came rushing on. Snap the dog
barked furiously. But above all the din was heard the shout of Colonel
Bob, "Forward, my brave boys!"

Not a picture started from its frame. Not a chair moved. But all of a
sudden the door opened, and a face looked in. It was Colonel Bob's papa.

"What's all this noise about, Robert?" said he. "This is not the place
for such games. Go out of doors if you want to play soldier. I can't
have such a drumming and shouting in the house."

This was rather a damper on Colonel Bob's military zeal; but what came
next was still worse.

"Do any of you boys know where to-day's 'Advertiser' is?" asked papa.

Colonel Bob came down from his high horse, threw aside his plume, took
off his chapeau, and handed it to his papa.

There was the "Advertiser" of that very day, folded up as a soldier-cap.

"Well, that's pretty business," said his papa, laughing. "Please give me
a chance to read the papers before you use them in this way." And he
went out and shut the door.

Colonel Bob stood leaning on his horse as if in deep thought. At last he
said, "Boys, this movement has failed. We must change our base. Follow
me." And he led the army out into the back garden.

                                                           UNCLE SAM.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE GEESE THAT CAME OVER THE LEA.


    WE talked and we laughed
      As we went to the sea,
    When an army of geese
      Came over the lea,
    With a cack, cack, cackle,
      And a pat, pat, patter;
    And, oh, what a fright
      We were in, all three!
    Which were the greater geese,--
      Just we three,
    Or the army of geese
      That came over the lea?

                         E. N. G.

[Illustration]




PAPA ROBIN.


ONE summer morning Elizabeth sat on the doorstep, reading. But she
looked up often to see the birds fly about, or to watch the butterflies
go sailing past.

By and by she heard a shrill chirping. "Poor little bird," she thought,
"where can it be? Is it hurt?" She went out into the yard, and looked
about her.

There, under a tree, was a baby-bird that had fallen out of its nest.
Elizabeth took it up gently. As it lay in her hand, it looked like a
soft ball. It chirped as loud as it could, and fluttered.

"Poor birdie," said Elizabeth, "I will try and take you home." And she
looked up into the tree. She could see the nest the fledgling had
tumbled out of; but she was not tall enough to reach it: so she stood
on a knot in the trunk of the tree, and put the nestling in its home.

She saw the father and the mother-bird in the tree, and said to herself
that they would take care of the little one. Then she went back to her
reading.

Pretty soon she heard the chirping again. This time she knew where to
look, and there was the baby-bird on the ground, crying and fluttering
as before.

[Illustration]

"Papa and mamma Robin ought to take care of you, birdling," she said.
But she stepped on the knotted tree-trunk, and put back the bird a
second time.

Then she sat down on the doorstep, and watched to see what the
parent-birds would do. They flew here and there about the nest, and sang
a few notes that Elizabeth knew must be bird-talk. She wondered if they
were trying to find a better place for their baby.

But as she was thinking how much care they were taking of it, out
tumbled the little one a third time. "You stupid old robin!" she cried.
"Do you expect some one to be putting back your birdie for you all day?
Why don't you keep it in the nest?"

She picked up the birdie, and was about to put it back a third time,
when, as she held it, a strange thing happened; for down flew the robin,
and gave her a sharp peck on the forehead.

Elizabeth stood still. She didn't know what to make of this. But soon
she began to laugh; and then she put the baby-bird gently on the ground,
and went away. She at last understood what papa Robin meant to say to
her by his peck. This is it: "Don't interfere when I'm teaching my child
to fly. You are very big, and perhaps you know a great deal; but you
don't seem to know that it's not right to keep birds in the nest all
summer. They would never find out what their wings are for."

                                                 FRANCES C. SPARHAWK.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

CARLO AND THE DUCKS.


"STOP, Carlo! Come back, sir! Be still!" cried Jane, trying to hold the
little dog by a string tied to his collar.

But Carlo was in chase of two ducklings, and did not mind Jane's call.
Of course the ducklings took to the water. Carlo ran after them to the
water's edge, but there he stopped.

What stopped him? Jane was tugging pretty hard at the string. That was
one thing that held him back; but that was not all. Carlo was not fond
of the water; but he would not have stopped for that.

I will tell you what stopped him. While the ducklings were swimming away
for dear life, the old mother-duck came sailing boldly up, with her
great yellow beak, and faced Master Carlo.

She looked like a sloop-of-war all ready for action. Carlo was a brave
dog; but he was afraid of her, for all that. So he stood still and
barked.

Madam Duck did not mind his noise in the least. She quacked at him
fiercely. This is what she meant to say: "Look here, my young friend,
you are a dog, and I am a duck. You are at home on the land, but I am at
home on the water. Bark as much as you please, but, if you know what is
good for your health, keep out of this pond, and let my ducklings
alone."

"Do you hear that, Carlo?" said Jane. "Now don't stop to answer, but
come with me like a good dog, and we will have a run in the woods."

And then Carlo gave up his chase of the ducks, and went quietly where
Jane led him.

                                                        JANE OLIVER.




THE NAUGHTY CAT.


LITTLE JACK.

    'TIS such a naughty, naughty cat!
    Old Tab, that's owned by aunty Gray:
    She growls, and spits, and shows her claws,
    As sharp as needles in her paws;

[Illustration]

    And, if I try with her to play,
    She always seems so full of spite,
    She's sure to scratch me, or to bite.
    My hands,--they were a frightful sight
    When I came home last Saturday;
    I'm sure that she would be no loss,
    If she were killed, she is so cross;
    Now, when I see her, "Scat, scat, scat!"
    I mean to say, "you naughty cat!"


LITTLE JANE.

    What, call my poor old Tabby cross!
    I'm sure she's very good with _me_;
    For, when _I_ go to aunty Gray's,
    She always close beside me stays.
    If I sit down, she climbs my knee,
    And rubs her head against my cheek,
    And acts as though she'd like to speak,
    And say she wants my friend to be.
    I'd rather have her for my own
    Than all the cats I've ever known:
    Black, yellow, Maltese, large and small,
    Old Tab's the nicest of them all.


JAMES.

    Yes, Tabby _is_ a knowing cat.
    When you have been at aunty Gray's,
    She's proved you both, and learned your ways:
    She finds that Jack would never fail
    To try and swing her by the tail,
    While Jane will softly stroke her fur;
    So she will answer by a purr,
    To show Jane's gentle touch she likes,
    But Jack, with her sharp claws, she strikes.
    My mother says we ought to treat
    With love each living thing we meet,
    And even pussy-cats can tell
    Who are the ones that use them well.

                             MARIAN DOUGLAS.




PICKING ORANGES.


WILLY and Ben are two little boys who live in the old city of Saint
Augustine. They do not have sleigh-rides and coasts; for Saint Augustine
is way down South, in Florida, where snow never falls.

But, while the boys and girls in the North are wearing mittens and
tippets and thick coats when they go out to play, Willy and Ben are
running about bare-headed in the orange-groves, or plucking roses from
the garden.

All around the house are orange-trees, and in among the glossy green
leaves hang the great yellow juicy oranges. The fruit is ripe early in
December, and ready to be picked.

Miles, the colored man, takes his big clippers and goes up the high
step-ladder which he has placed near the tree. He cuts each orange from
the branch, taking care not to get hurt by the long, sharp thorns.

Willy stands at the foot of the ladder, ready to catch the oranges as
Miles tosses them down. Sometimes they pick five or six baskets in an
afternoon. Miles says Willy is a "bery good catch." He sometimes tires
of catching them; but he never tires of eating them.

I looked into the packing-room this morning, and there lay seventeen
hundred yellow balls. Papa lets both his little boys help wrap the
oranges. Each orange is wrapped in a piece of tissue-paper that is cut
just the right size. Willy always says as he begins, "Now let's see
who'll beat!" Do you know what he means?

Ben cannot wrap oranges as fast as Willy; but, as they are wrapped, he
hands them to papa to pack in boxes. He can read the word "Boston" that
papa writes in black letters on the outside of the boxes.

[Illustration]

Of course papa pays his workers, and they take their money all to mamma
to keep for them. They have so much whispering to do about it, that I
think they are saving it to buy holiday gifts.

                                                      JIMMIE.




[Illustration]

THE MAY-QUEEN.


    "WHEN I was little," said grandma Gray,
    "We used to welcome the month of May
    With a song and a dance on the village green,
    Choosing and crowning our May-day queen.
    We used to choose of the prettiest girls,
    The one who had the sunniest curls,
    The one who had the merriest eyes,
    As clear and bright as the May-day skies.

    "We made her throne of the daisies white,
    And of yellow buttercups, golden bright,
    And we twined gay blossoms about the hair
    Of our dear little queen so sweet and fair."
    So grandma said, and the children heard,
    And a loving thought in each heart was stirred;
    And they whispered together, and laughed in glee,
    "Dear grandmamma shall our May-queen be!"

[Illustration]

    Then they brought the chair with the cushioned seat,
    And the cushioned footstool for grandma's feet,
    And led her merrily to the throne,
    And crowned her queen of their hearts alone.
    They twined the daisies and buttercups bright
    In the queen's soft hair so silvery white,
    And better than jewels or necklace rare,
    Were the clasping arms of those children fair.

    And the bees and butterflies hovered around;
    And the sunbeams danced all over the ground;
    And the birds sang merrily in the trees;
    And the breath of summer was in the breeze;
    And the delicate hue of the azure skies
    Seemed to lend new light to the loving eyes
    Of happy, dear old grandmamma Gray,
    Crowned by the children their "Queen of May."

                                 MARY D. BRINE.




SING, PRETTY BIRDS.


    SING, pretty birds, and build your nests,
      The fields are green, the skies are clear;
    Sing, pretty birds, and build your nests,
      The world is glad to have you here.

    Among the orchards and the groves,
      While summer days are fair and long,
    You brighten every tree and bush,
      You fill the air with loving song.

    At early dawn your notes are heard
      In happy greeting to the day,
    Your twilight voices softly tell
      When sunshine hours have passed away.

    Sing, pretty birds, and build your nests,
      The fields are green, the skies are clear;
    Sing, pretty birds, and build your nests,
      The world is glad to have you here.

                              M. E. N. HATHAWAY.

[Illustration]




MARY AND JENNY.


MARY strikes the shuttle-cock a hard blow with the battle-door. Up it
goes into the air, and down it falls into the grass. There it is; but
the next thing to be done is to find it. Who will pick it up?

[Illustration]

Jenny stands with her hands behind her. She has a roguish look. What has
she in her hands? Is it an apple? No. Is it an orange? No. Is it a ball?
No. Guess again. Ah! I know what it is. It is the shuttle-cock.

[Illustration]

                                                      G. H. I.




[Illustration: DRAWING-LESSON.

VOL. XXIX.--NO. 5.]




PIGGY'S SPOON.


PIGGY had a little house close by the barn. There were two rooms in his
house. In one room he had his bed; in the other he had a trough.

On one side of his house there was a door that opened into a pen. The
pen was in the orchard where the sweet apples grew. Sometimes in summer
the apples would fall down from the trees into the pen; then piggy would
pick them up and eat them. Sometimes they would strike him on his back
when they fell; but he did not mind that; he was always glad to get
them.

He had his bed of warm straw to sleep in at night, and every day he had
as much as he wanted to eat. He had all a pig could wish for: so he was
contented. One morning farmer Jackson brought a pailful of milk for
piggy's breakfast. He poured the milk into the trough, and piggy made
haste to come and eat it.

While he was eating, something hard and cold came into his mouth. He bit
it, but found that it was not good: so he left it. He ate up all the
milk. When it was gone, he saw a bright silver spoon in the bottom of
the trough.

"Oh!" said piggy, "I see how it is. They would like to have me eat with
a spoon; but they would never make me fat in that way. I should be
hungry all the time. Now I can eat fast and grow fast, and I like my own
way best."

So piggy turned up his nose at the spoon. Then he went out into the pen,
and began to root in the dirt to find bits of apple. "Fine work I should
make using a spoon," said piggy, and he laughed whenever he thought of
it.

At night farmer Jackson came to bring his supper. He saw the spoon in
the trough, took it out and carried it into the house. When his wife saw
it, she said somebody had been very careless, and dropped the spoon into
piggy's pail. She could not find out who had done it, though she asked
everybody. Then she thought that perhaps she had done it herself. She
was glad to get her spoon back again, and piggy was glad to have it
taken from the trough.

He had left the print of his teeth on it: so it was afterwards called
"Piggy's spoon."

                                                MARY E. N. HATHAWAY.




[Illustration]




THE TRAVELLER.


    SOMETIMES he travels in a boat;
      (A bench turned upside down,)
    Sometimes his mother's rocking-chair
      Takes him from town to town.

[Illustration]

    For journeying, by sea or land,
      He always has a plan,
    He'll be a famous traveller
      When he grows to be a man.

                           W. G.




BOUNCER.


"GRANDMA, grandma, may we have it? may we have it?" cried three excited
little voices, as three little boys came running into the room.

"Have what?" said grandma smiling, as she looked up from her book. "The
measles?"

"Why, grandma, of course it isn't the measles," said Ned, the eldest.
"It is a dog,--a real puppy. Mrs. James told Arthur she would give it to
him, if you were willing."

Grandma thought of her nice flower-beds and her well-kept driveway. She
did not want to have a dog running about in them. But then she saw the
three wistful faces waiting for her answer, and so she said "Yes."

[Illustration]

Mrs. James had promised that she would bring it to Arthur by Saturday.
All the boys were in haste for the day to come, and Arthur said, "Now,
mamma, there will be three days more and then 'dog-day.'"

Saturday came at last. Arthur sat by the front-door watching. About four
o'clock in the afternoon, he came to me and said, very sadly, "Do you
really think she will come to-day, mamma?"--"Yes," said I.

He took his seat on the steps, and in a few minutes I heard a joyful
cry: "Here's my dog! here's my dog!" The other boys joined in the shout.
Was there ever such joy!

Bouncer,--for that was the puppy's name,--was a fine water-spaniel. He
grew very fast, and proved very kind and playful. The three boys became
very fond of him. The first thing in the morning, and the last thing at
night, they would all rush out of doors for a romp with Bouncer.

He was always ready for a frolic. Nothing pleased him so much as a dash
into the lake. Then he was in his glory. He would spring into the water
after any thing that the boys would throw.

Once he saved a man's hat that had blown overboard; and if the man had
gone over with his hat, I have no doubt that Bouncer would have saved
him too. But, as the man was safe on shore all the time, Bouncer had no
chance to prove himself a hero. That wasn't Bouncer's fault, you know.

                                                      M. C. W.

[Illustration]




THE MOUSE-TRAP.


[Illustration]

    THE cheese smelt tempting in its little house:
    "I'll get it, never fear!" cried Master Mouse.


[Illustration]

    Caught in the trap, with all their might and main,
    His parents try to get him out again.


[Illustration]

    Alas! alas! exertions well applied
    Bring but a swift collapse undignified.


[Illustration]

    A happy thought: "We'll roll the box about,
    And thus, perchance, get valiant Brownie out!"


[Illustration]

    Still happier thought: a wall its aid extends;
    And Brownie, thankful for such clever friends,


[Illustration]

    Darts out in triumph, bearing high the cheese,
    Then shares the well-won spoil, and feasts at ease.




[Illustration]




ONE CAT AND TWO PIGS.


    A POOR little kitty turned out by its mother,
    Without any sister, without any brother,
            Was very unhappy,
            Was very unhappy;
          Oh, very unhappy indeed!

    She couldn't find any companions to stay with;
    She couldn't find any companions to play with;
            And so she was lonely,
            Oh! ever so lonely;
          Oh, yes! she was lonely indeed.

    One morning she noticed two little pigs running
    Along by the house; they were pretty and cunning,
            And it made little kitty
            Feel bad--what a pity!--
          A very great pity indeed.

    She made their acquaintance, and then in clear weather
    The three funny playmates would frolic together,
            And kitty was happy,
            No doubt she was happy;
          Oh, yes! very happy indeed.

    The piggies would drink up the milk that was given
    To kitty, who oft from the basin was driven;
            For they were quite greedy,
            Yes, rather too greedy;
          Oh, yes! very greedy indeed.

[Illustration]

    And, when they had corn, how the piggies would chew it!
    While kitty looked on, wondering how they could do it:
            'Twas queer that she couldn't,
            Quite strange that she couldn't;
          She'd tried--but she couldn't indeed!

    At night, when the piggies in slumber were dozing,
    Miss Kitty curled up on their backs was reposing,
            And all were quite happy,
            Remarkably happy;
          Oh, yes! very happy indeed.

                                     JOSEPHINE POLLARD.




HARRY AND JOHN.


[Illustration]

HARRY waves his flag to stop a train of cars. He has seen a man do it at
the railroad station. But the train rushes by, and does not mind him in
the least. This makes him look sad.

[Illustration]

John stands and looks on. He is dressed in a new sailor-suit. He feels
so grand that he does not care whether the train stops or not. There is
a very broad grin on his face. We should see it if we could make him
turn round and look at us.

                                                      J. K. L.




"INCHES."


HIS real name was Miles; but one of his papa's friends said that such a
little chap was too small to be called Miles, and it would be better to
begin with "Inches" and go up gradually: so we nicknamed him "Inches."

His papa and mamma were Americans; but their little boy was born in
Assam, and until he was four years old he had never seen any other
country.

Now, you will want to know where Assam is. I will tell you. It is a
kingdom in India, lying west of China, and south of the great Himalaya
Mountains. Some peaks of these mountains can be seen on a clear day from
the house where Inches lived.

One morning early, our little friend woke, and called out in the
Assamese language (for he could not speak English), "Tezzan, take me."

Tezzan his "bearer"--so a man-nurse is called in Assam--came quickly,
and dressed his little charge. Then, after giving him a slice of dry
toast and a nice plantain for his breakfast, he took the little boy by
the hand, and started out with him for their regular morning-walk.

They went down along the bank of the Brahmaputra River, and saw many
sights that would look very strange to Americans. A little below the
house, Inches called on Tezzan to stop, and let him watch some elephants
that were swimming across the river. He called the elephant a _hatee_,
giving the "a" in the word the same sound we give it when we say father.

All they could see of the elephants was the tops of their heads, and
occasionally their trunks when they threw them out of the water for a
fresh breath of air. The drivers stood on the necks of the elephants,
with only a rope, tied round the great creatures' necks, to hold on by.

By and by they came struggling up the bank, one after another,--eight of
them,--and stood panting and dripping to rest a little. Scarcely had
they set their feet on dry land when a little ferry-boat came steaming
along, and just as she got close to the bank she blew a long, loud
whistle.

[Illustration]

The elephants were frightened, and ran snorting and trumpeting right up
the road where Inches and his bearer were standing. Inches was very much
frightened, and ran too. But no harm was done, and after a little while
Inches had a good laugh, when he thought how the elephants ran away from
the little bustling steamer.

After this was all over and the elephants were slowly jogging along,
Inches and his bearer started on again. They met many people; but very
few of them were white. There were only fifteen white children to be
found for many miles: so they, of course, knew each other well.

Down the road, further on, they came to a sweetmeat-vender's shop. His
candies and sweets were put on flat bamboo or cane plates, and all
arranged outside the shop itself, on a platform made of bamboo.

Inches wished Tezzan to buy some sweets for him; but they had brought no
_pice_, so could not. (Pice are small copper coins used in India, worth
about three-fourths of one cent each.)

The little boy was on the point of crying, when he heard his mamma
calling; and, sure enough, there she was, and papa, too, waiting for him
in the pony-carriage. He ran quickly, and climbed into his mamma's lap,
and was soon home again.

                                                      M. R. B.




SMALL BEGINNING.


[Illustration]

    WHEN the first little crocus peeped out of the ground,
    And slyly looked round,
    Not a flower was awake, not a bit of new green
    Was anywhere seen;
    And it seemed, with a shiver the little one said,
          "Oh, I am afraid,
    The trees are so naked, the earth is so black!
          Please let me go back!
    You have called me too early, my dear Mother Spring,
          I am such a wee thing!"

[Illustration]

    Then a bluebird whistled, "Oh, no! my dear,
          It is good you are here;
    For now we are sure that spring is near."
    Then a sober old robin came bustling by
          With the sleep in his eye;
    "Ah, me! how stupid I was to wait;
          And now I am late!
    The bluebird has piped, and the crocus has come;
          And you know by the hum
    The hot little bee is beating his drum."

    Then sweet Mother Spring, with a sunshine kiss,
          Said something like this:
    "Thanks, brave little crocus, so slender and small,
          For heeding my call
    While orchards were leafless, and snow-drifts staid
          In the all-day shade:
    You are telling us sweetly that soonest begun
          The soonest is done;
    That little by little makes up the great,
    And early obeying is better than late."

                                GEORGE S. BURLEIGH.




JENNY WREN.


[Illustration]

    JENNY WREN'S a lady,
      Very quiet she:
    That's her pretty mansion
      In the hollow tree.
    Peep into her parlor,
      Carpeted with down;
    There you'll see her sitting
      In her modest gown.

    Jenny Wren is busy,
      Summer days are near,
    And she has a houseful:
      Listen, and you'll hear.
    Little mouths are open
      From the hour she wakes,
    And to feed her darlings
      All her time it takes.

    Jenny Wren is moving:
      Breezes hurry by;
    Purple leaves are falling;
      Chilly grows the sky.
    Long before the snowflakes
      Through the orchard roam,
    Should you call on Jenny,
      Nobody's at home.

                 GEORGE COOPER.




[Illustration: Music]




DADDY FROG.

    Words by GEO. COOPER.       Music by T. CRAMPTON.


    1 Old Daddy Frog lives in a bog,
        And his coat is bottle-green;
            Yellow his vest;
            handsomely drest,
        His pretty shape is seen.
            Puffing with pride,
            there at his side
        His dame is sure to be.
            Smiling, he says,
            "No one could raise
        A finer family;"

    Chorus.

      Singing "Cou, cou, cou, Ker-chunk!"

    2 Old Daddy Frog leaps on a log,
        In a spry and jaunty way;
            Calling his boys--
            Oh, what a noise!
        He joins them in their play.
            Hipperty-hop!
            Under they pop,
        And Daddy Frog, says he,
            "Isn't it fine?
            How they will shine,
        This polished family."

    3 Old Daddy Frog lives in the bog
        Till the summer days are done;
            Little frogs grow,
            Dressed like a beau
        Now is each model son;
            Daddy Frog's eyes
            Wink with surprise,
        Quite filled with delight is he;
            Dame at his side
            Chuckles with pride,
        "There's no such family!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes: Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

The original text for the January issue had a table of contents that
spanned six issues. This was divided amongst those issues.

Additionally, only the January issue had a title page. This page was
copied for the remaining five issues. Each issue had the number added on
the title page after the Volume number.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Nursery, May 1881, Vol. XXIX, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NURSERY, MAY 1881, VOL. XXIX ***

***** This file should be named 40756.txt or 40756.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/7/5/40756/

Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net Music
transcribed by June Troyer.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
