The Project Gutenberg EBook of Little Jeanne of France, by Madeline Brandeis

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Little Jeanne of France

Author: Madeline Brandeis

Release Date: September 20, 2012 [EBook #40806]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE JEANNE OF FRANCE ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Veronika Redfern and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Little Jeanne of France

[Illustration: LITTLE JEANNE OF FRANCE]




     LITTLE JEANNE
     _of_ FRANCE

     BY
     MADELINE BRANDEIS

     _Producer of the Motion Pictures_

     "The Little Indian Weaver"
     "The Wee Scotch Piper"
     "The Little Dutch Tulip Girl"
     "The Little Swiss Wood Carver"

     Distributed by Pathe Exchange, Inc., New York City

     _Photographic Illustrations made in France by the Author_

     GROSSET & DUNLAP
     PUBLISHERS    NEW YORK
     _by arrangement with the A. Flanagan Company_




     COPYRIGHT, 1929, BY A. FLANAGAN COMPANY

     PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




PREFACE


When I began to write these stories about children of all lands I had
just returned from Europe whither I journeyed with Marie and Ref. Maybe
you don't know Marie and Ref. I'll introduce them: Please meet Marie, my
very little daughter, and Ref, my very big reflex camera.

These two are my helpers. Marie helps by being a little girl who knows
what other little girls like and by telling me; and Ref helps by
snapping pictures of everything interesting that Marie and I see on our
travels. I couldn't get along without them.

Several years have gone by since we started our work together and Marie
is a bigger girl--but Ref hasn't changed one bit. Ref hasn't changed any
more than my interest in writing these books for you. And I hope that
_you_ hope that I'll never change, because I want to keep on writing
until we'll have no more countries to write about--unless, of course,
some one discovers a new country.

Even if a new country isn't discovered, we'll find foreign children to
talk about--maybe the children in Mars! Who knows? Nobody. Not even
Marie--and Marie usually knows about most things. That's the reason why,
you see, though I sign myself

[Illustration: Signature of Madeline Brandeis]

                             I am really only
                                                         Marie's Mother.




DEDICATION


     To every child of every land,
       Little sister, little brother,
     As in this book your lives unfold,
       May you learn to love each other.




CONTENTS


                                       Page
     Chapter I
     Madame Villard                      11

     Chapter II
     Paul                                18

     Chapter III
     To the Front!                       25

     Chapter IV
     On to Paris                         32

     Chapter V
     Suzanne                             39

     Chapter VI
     Jeanne                              52

     Chapter VII
     Major d'Artrot                      64

     Chapter VIII
     The Guignol                         78

     Chapter IX
     An Adventure in the Bois            90

     Chapter X
     The Live Puppet                    101

     Chapter XI
     Little Spoiled Margot              108

     Chapter XII
     At Auntie Sue's Shop               114

     Chapter XIII
     Come and Play                      127

     Chapter XIV
     A Drive Through Paris              135

     Chapter XV
     Jeanne and Margot                  148

     Chapter XVI
     "I Want to Play"                   156

     Chapter XVII
     A Call for Help                    168

     Chapter XVIII
     Margot's Story                     179




[Illustration: THE BOIS DE BOULOGNE (Page 90)]




Little Jeanne of France




CHAPTER I

MADAME VILLARD


"The baby is a dear little dark-haired girl, Madame Villard
(v[=e]-laer')," said the nurse.

Madame Villard came forward, and her face expressed the joy in her
heart.

It was the twilight hour. Paris was busily honking and tooting outside
the broad windows of Madame Villard's apartment.

The apartment looked out upon one of Paris' finest avenues. And Paris
has many fine avenues. This had been Madame Villard's home for many
years.

[Illustration: THE APARTMENT ON AVENUE CHAMPS ELYSEES WHERE MADAME
VILLARD LIVED]

It was here she had raised her family--her boy and her girl. It was the
same girl whose "dear little, dark-haired baby" had just come into the
world.

"May I--may I see her?" asked Madame Villard softly.

The nurse led her into the room, and the grandmother looked with
tear-dimmed eyes upon this first grandchild.

Baby Margot (maer'-g[=o]) was Madame's first grandchild. At least, that
is what Madame thought. Little did Madame Villard know that at this same
moment another grandchild of hers was opening wondering brown eyes upon
the same world!

The same world and the same country, France! Yet how different was
this other grandchild's world from the world of little Margot!

Little soft, comfy Margot in her billowy pink and lace down! Little
soft, cuddly Margot, whom Grandmother took into her arms that day! All
the while, she did not know about the other grandchild.

That other grandchild did not have soft billowy pink and lace pillows on
which to rest her head. That other grandchild did not have a
grandmother's loving arms into which she could cuddle down.

That other grandchild--but I must not talk of her. I must talk of
Margot. For Margot was all that Grandmother Villard could talk about or
even think of that day.

Her own little daughter's daughter! It was so wonderful to think of
Margot's being here. So wonderful for poor Madame Villard, whose only
son Paul was fighting at the front in the Great War.

When the war had started, Paul had gone to fight for France. Now it was
many months since Madame had heard from her soldier boy.

Soon after Paul had joined the army, he had met and married Jeanne
(j[=e]n) in a tiny village of France. Paul had written to his mother in
Paris, telling her of his marriage.

[Illustration: A QUAINT STREET IN A LITTLE FRENCH VILLAGE FAR FROM THE
ROAR OF CITIES]

"You will love Jeanne," wrote Paul. "When this war is over, I shall
bring her to Paris."

But the war was not over, and Jeanne had never been brought to Paris.
Madame Villard did not hear from her boy again.

She did not know that on this happy day, while she held her little
grandchild Margot in her arms, Paul's little girl was opening her brown
eyes upon a different-looking world.

In a sad, war-stricken, bleak little village far from Paris, this other
grandchild was born.




CHAPTER II

PAUL


Jeanne's baby was as beautiful as little Margot, though she did not lie
upon lacy pillows in a Paris apartment.

Jeanne held the child tightly in her arms, as she rocked back and forth
on a broken chair, and as she rocked she looked out upon the poor,
little village street. Jeanne was a troubled young mother.

Paul had been at the front for many weeks now. He did not even know that
little Jeanne was born. If only Paul would come back to the village!

There was talk of an invasion. Many small towns of France were being
invaded and burned by the enemy. Would this little town be next?

Each day the villagers asked themselves this question and lived in
terror. Many had already started to tramp toward Paris. Many were
deserting the village.

But Jeanne could not go. There was little Jeanne now. And even if she
could have gone, she would never have left until her Paul had come back.

Each day a letter went to Paul at the front. Each day Jeanne trembled at
the postman's footsteps outside her door.

But no news. Only whispers and more whispers of invasion--invasion!

Oh, if Paul would only come back!

Jeanne rocked her baby.

The invasion came. It was one of the last invasions before the Great War
came to an end. The enemy burned the little town to the ground.

The great march of the refugees had started. The roads to Paris were
alive with homeless people--struggling, homeless humanity, with only the
hope of reaching Paris alive.

The village--Paul's village--was a desolate place. As the troop of
French soldiers returned after the invasion and marched into it, there
was not a soul to be seen. Among those marching French soldiers came
Paul.

[Illustration: A GROUP OF TYPICAL THATCH ROOFED HOUSES IN A LITTLE
FRENCH VILLAGE]

To the scene of his home he ran. Everything--everything was in ruins!
His house! Gone! His wife!

"Jeanne! Jeanne!" Paul's voice was a shriek.

"Look, my son, in the cellar. Many of them hid in cellars for days
before." It was a kind-faced old man speaking.

The distracted Paul dashed into the underground stone cave and called
again, "Jeanne, oh, Jeanne!"

A little sound came from a corner in the dark, damp cellar. The soldier
stopped suddenly, and his ears became those of a forest animal, so
sharp, so alert was he.

"My little one! Jeanne!" he called.

He struck a match. His heart nearly stopped. His Jeanne was not there.
But something moved in the corner--something small and white.

"A baby!" Paul gasped.

His voice had dropped to a husky whisper. He lifted the small, white
bundle. It was a baby--a tiny young baby!

The soldier carried the child out into the light. The little one touched
his cheek with a pink hand.

"A baby!" breathed Paul, as he held this bit of humanity close in his
arms. "And my Jeanne! We were to have had one like this soon."

Then Paul noticed something around the baby's neck. A small locket had
been tied around her neck with a piece of faded ribbon.

With trembling fingers, Paul opened the locket. The soldier brushed his
hand across his eyes, for he could not believe what he saw. Inside the
locket was his picture!




CHAPTER III

TO THE FRONT!


Paul sat there and rocked the baby--his baby! He sat and rocked little
Jeanne, much as his wife had rocked her before that terrible invasion.

Now his wife was gone. Little Jeanne's mother had not been able to
escape as had many of the other villagers. She was dead. Weak and
undernourished, the poor woman had been unable to withstand hardships
and suffering in a cold, damp cellar.

The invasion had killed little Jeanne's mother. Paul alone now remained
to care for this helpless mite.

Paul was a troubled, frantic soldier. He would be called back to the
front at any moment. What would he do with the baby?

Just then he heard the bugle and the call to arms: "To the front."

A scurrying soldier passed him and called out, "Make haste. To the
front!"

Paul could not move. The baby was asleep in his arms. Little, trusting
baby--his baby! The soldier dropped his head in the folds of little
Jeanne's dress and sobbed.

A slight tap upon his shoulder brought Paul's head erect. Bending over
him was the same old man. It was the kind-faced little peasant who had
spoken to him at the cellar door.

"Come, my son," he said, "You are a soldier of France! Would that my old
body could fight in your place! But it is you who must go. France needs
you, my son."

He slowly helped the soldier to his feet, as the baby in his arms slept
on.

Paul saw the light of goodness shining out of the old eyes. With a surge
of joy in his heart, he held out his child.

"Oh, my friend," he cried, "if you will take my baby, I can go. I can
then go and fight for France. But never, never could I leave her alone,
even for France! Take her, friend, and guard her with your life."

[Illustration: A TYPICAL HAMLET IN A BEAUTIFUL SECTION OF FRANCE]

The old peasant's eyes grew troubled. For he knew not what he, a
poverty-stricken, weakened old man might do with an infant, here in this
smoldering ruin of a village. But he held out his arms.

"Yes, I shall take care of her," he promised.

"With your life, my friend," repeated Paul. "Here," he added, as he
pulled from his pockets handfuls of small coins. "All I have. Take it.
Take her to Paris--to my mother. Wait!"

And Paul then wrote a note--a scrawled, jumbled note--to his mother,
Madame Villard, in Paris.

"I am telling her you are coming with my baby--with little Jeanne," he
said. "Take her to the address I write on this paper. See! I pin it to
her little skirt. Hurry, my friend. Take her. Take her. Adieu, adieu, my
little Jeanne!"

The last words were heard afar off, as the father of little Jeanne
joined his regiment. Then he marched to the front, into the face of a
cruel battle.

The old man stood still and watched the soldier disappearing. He and
this baby were the only remaining inhabitants in this town.

The rest were marching, marching, on their way to Paris. He, too, must
march to Paris.

An old man with a baby!

It was a long way, but he had given his word to a soldier of France.
Did this not make of him a soldier, too?

The old body stiffened, and he stood erect. His hand slowly saluted the
departing troops. He, too, was a soldier.

He looked at the address which Paul had pinned to the skirt
of little Jeanne: Madame Villard, Avenue Champs Elysees
(shaen'z[=a]-l[=e]-z[=a]'), Paris.

Paris? Why, yes; he could walk to Paris. He was a soldier! Marching
refugees from other villages were constantly passing. The old man joined
the peasant procession.

On his lips were the words, "On, on, on to Paris! On, on, on!"

And little Jeanne thought it was a lullaby and slept.




CHAPTER IV

ON TO PARIS


On trudged the old man. In his arms slept little Jeanne. She was as
happy as Margot that day. Margot lay among the sweet-smelling cushions
of her baby carriage and was rolled along the smooth walks of Paris
parks.

But little Jeanne's "carriage" was not so soft, nor did it roll along.
Indeed the old man's gait grew more and more jerky with every step. He
watched the rest of the refugees passing him by.

There were families with many children. There were men and women
carrying mattresses and clothing, pots and pans. There were dogs
running along and barking.

They all passed the old man. Each one had another with whom to walk. But
the old man walked alone.

It grew very hard--this walking. He rested often, and each time it was
harder to rise and to start the walk again. Only his promise to a
soldier of France kept his old body going. At last he dropped heavily at
the side of the road.

Jeanne was asleep. The thud awoke her. The old man could go no farther.

Jeanne did not cry. She was happy and satisfied. She had been well cared
for. When they had passed farms with cows, little Jeanne had been fed.

The old man looked at her and touched the little soft cheek with his
horny hand.

"Little one, I am finished," he whispered. "I have tried so hard, but
Paris is too far--too far. It is too far to the front."

With that, the old man slept. Jeanne lay in his arms and blew bubbles to
the sky. She watched the trees as they swayed back and forth.

"This world is a pleasant place," it would seem the tiny girl was
thinking.

[Illustration: VERY OLD STONE HOUSES IN A LITTLE VILLAGE OF FRANCE]

For a long time the old man slept. He was awakened by the sound of a
clear voice. He looked into the sad face of a young woman in a black
shawl. She was holding Jeanne's two little hands in her fingers.

"Is this your baby?" she asked.

"No, no, my child. I am taking her to Paris to--."

He tried to lift himself but fell back again.

"You are spent. You must not carry this child any farther. Come; give
her to me," said the woman.

She took little Jeanne in her arms. The old man's eyes searched her face
to try to fathom it. He tried to find there what he hoped to see:
kindness. But all he saw was sadness.

Suzanne Moreau (m[=o]-r[=o]') was one of the many refugees who had fled
from her invaded village. She was one of the few in that long line who
marched alone. Suzanne had always lived alone, as long as she could
remember. Her life had been a lonely one. She had been a dressmaker in
the small town where she had lived.

Everyone there had known her as Auntie Sue. She was Auntie Sue to
children and grown-ups alike.

The old man tried to fathom Suzanne as he looked deep into her eyes and
watched her wrap little Jeanne carefully in her shawl.

"I am quite alone," she said. "I am strong and shall make the march
easily. Do not fear."

She gave her hand to the old man and he kissed it.

"God bless you," he breathed. Then he reminded her, "Remember: Avenue
Champs Elysees, Madame Villard."

She nodded her head. She smiled at him and was off.




CHAPTER V

SUZANNE


It was a month since the day when Madame Villard had received two
letters. Just a month had passed since the silver-haired lady and her
daughter had pored over two such different letters.

One was a scrawl--Paul's. He wrote that his baby was on her way to Paris
to her grandmother. It was a dirty, scrawly note, but full of hope to
the two who read it.

The next letter, neat and precise, was from the government. Before they
opened it, the two women knew: Paul's little one was now an orphan. For
a month, how that mother and sister waited!

With Madame Villard lived her daughter and her daughter's husband. They
were the parents of Baby Margot.

Margot's father had come back from the war. But though he had returned
to his dear ones, he would never again be able to walk. He would be an
invalid for life. So Margot's mother had two helpless ones to care for.
And one of those was Margot's father.

Grandmother had taken care of little Margot from the day of her birth.
Starry-eyed Baby Margot was Grandmother Villard's charge--and a joyous
charge to the old lady. But despite the happiness of her Margot, the
heart of Madame Villard yearned for that other wee one--her son's little
orphaned daughter.

She waited longingly for Paul's child to be brought to her. She waited
until she could wait no longer. Then she went out in search of little
Jeanne.

Madame Villard traveled to many villages in her search. She even asked
the government to help her.

She tried so hard to speed the little one's arrival. But she could not.
The child was never brought to her.

And now, to-day, a month having elapsed, Madame Villard was again
preparing to motor through the country to search. She intended to stop
at a little graveyard in the Argonne (aer-g[=o]n') and pray.

[Illustration: A UNIQUE OLD WINDMILL IN PICTURESQUE FRANCE]

And while Madame Villard waited thus for little Jeanne, Suzanne Moreau
was bringing the baby to Paris.

On the tramp Suzanne had found the child a sweet and tender thing.
Little Jeanne had hardly ever cried. She was satisfied and sleepy, or
gurgling and gay.

Her life had been a rough one and her feedings irregular and sometimes
insufficient. Still the baby had seemed happy, and Suzanne had smiled a
great deal more than she had ever before smiled in her life.

Before the march was over, little Jeanne was the only child Suzanne had
ever kissed.

For a long time after reaching Paris, Suzanne Moreau's only thought was
to tend this baby for whom she had promised to care.

She expected to take the baby to the home where it belonged. But her
first thought was to give the child a few days' good care and food
before giving her up.

It was a thought which Suzanne would never have admitted was selfish.
But the truth was that little Jeanne's baby fingers had so tenderly
wound themselves about the heart of Suzanne Moreau that already the
thought of parting with her was unbearable. A few days passed. Then a
week, and then more days.

"I should. I should," sighed Suzanne, as she watched the little girl
sucking contentedly on her bottle.

Then when the bottle was emptied, Baby Jeanne lifted her two pink hands.

In her arms Suzanne rocked the baby back and forth and murmured, "No,
no, my little one, ma cherie (mae sh[)e]r-[=e]', which means "my dear" in
French), I cannot give you up. Not yet."

This went on for some time. At last one night Suzanne determined to go
to that address on the Avenue Champs Elysees. She went alone. She left
the child in the care of a woman with whom she boarded.

Before the tall stone building, Suzanne stood and marveled. It seemed a
palace to the little village dressmaker. How could she keep this child
from a home like that? To-morrow, yes, to-morrow, she would take Jeanne
to her rightful home.

As she turned to leave, a big motor car drew up at the curb, and a black
figure stepped out. Madame Villard had returned from another
unsuccessful search. She was returning to her daughter and to little
Margot, discouraged, disappointed, and heart-sick.

Little did she know that the slight figure turning the corner was
Suzanne Moreau. Little did she dream that this woman turning the
corner was hurrying back to her own grandchild, who slept in a poor
little Paris boarding house.

[Illustration: THE MARIE ANTOINETTE COTTAGE NEAR VERSAILLES PALACE]

Suzanne began to arrange the few little clothes she had bought for
Jeanne. She made a bundle. Then she took from her drawer the locket
which the child had worn about her neck. She opened it.

Paul's face seemed to be smiling at her. Often before she had opened
this locket, but never had the soldier face seemed so happy as now.
Suzanne knew why. It was because she was going to take Jeanne to her
place--her rightful home.

Her heart was fluttering and her hands were shaking as she put the
locket about the child's neck. Then she sat by the little cradle. Before
she knew it, the tears were falling down her cheeks.

Why did she care this way? Suzanne asked herself. She had lived alone
for many years. For many years she had had nothing to love. Why could
she not go on?

Why must this tiny bit of life, sleeping so sweetly before her, make all
this difference and make her cry?

Jeanne stirred. The little pink hands went up. It was a gesture Suzanne
had come to love, to wait for, to thrill at. Slowly she raised Jeanne
from the cradle and held her.

The baby's hands gently touched her cheeks. One little hand was patting
a wet, wet cheek.

Then it stopped, and a soft head slowly sank upon Suzanne's breast.
Jeanne was asleep.

Suzanne sat staring ahead of her. The baby had made a decision for
Suzanne.

Cruelly and unfairly, in her mind Suzanne blamed little Jeanne for the
decision she made that night. But her torn heart could not have stood
the blame. She knew and felt only one thing.

To the sleeping child she cried, "I cannot, cannot give you up, my
little Jeanne. Never, never!"

The locket with the soldier's picture was put away under lock and key.
And Madame Villard continued to wait for her grandchild.




CHAPTER VI

JEANNE


Jeanne grew under the loving and tender care of Suzanne. Never once did
Suzanne approach the stately apartment house on the Avenue Champs
Elysees. Never once did she allow Jeanne to go in that direction.

[Illustration: JEANNE]

Several years passed. Jeanne was now a tall girl. But still Auntie Sue
had a terrible feeling about that apartment house.

Suzanne was still known as Auntie Sue. And between the poor little
dressmaker and Jeanne, Auntie Sue's Shop had grown up in Paris.

Paris, you know, is the place from which your mother's or auntie's or
grandmother's most fashionable clothes come. Nearly everyone who visits
Paris buys a Parisian gown.

The French are well dressed. The French dressmakers know well how to cut
and fit and sew.

Then, too, when little ones go to Paris with their mothers, they, too,
are fitted with dresses and hats and coats made by the Parisian
dressmakers.

Auntie Sue fitted many, many children. She fitted children who lived in
Paris, also children who came from America and Spain and Italy and
Germany and from other parts of the world.

For Auntie Sue's Shop was well known. It was known because, for one
thing, Auntie Sue was clever and could make beautiful children's
clothes.

[Illustration: THE WINDOW OF AUNTIE SUE'S SHOP IN PARIS]

It was known for another reason, and perhaps a better one. That reason
was Jeanne!

Jeanne put on all of Auntie's little models. She showed them to the
people who came to buy clothes for their children.

Jeanne walked about the pretty little room, with its dainty show-cases
and Parisian dolls and model coats and hats. She walked about the room
and wore the clothes that Auntie Sue had made.

And when the children's mothers came to buy, they said, "Isn't that a
beautiful little coat?" or, "Doesn't she look sweet in that little
dress?"

Jeanne always looked sweet and pretty in everything she wore. Jeanne
walked very straight and held her head high and smiled at all the
people. She seemed to belong in those clothes.

So every mother thought that her child would look as well as Jeanne
looked. Of course some of them did, but not all. Jeanne was known
throughout Paris--throughout "child-and-mother-Paris"--as the "Little
Model."

You may think that she became haughty and proud because so many people
knew about her and came to watch her. But this was not the case at all.

Jeanne never thought of things like that. She was too busy ever to think
of such things. While she loved to help Auntie Sue, it was hard work,
and often Auntie Sue worried.

"Ma cherie," she would say to Jeanne as she stroked her silky brown
curls, "you are happy; are you not? You do not mind the work--the hard,
hard work? Ah, Jeanne, it is not pleasant sometimes, I know."

And this was true. For when many, many mothers and children came, Jeanne
had to walk back and forth, back and forth, through the room. She had to
show the silken dresses, the velvet coats, the little fluffy bonnets
and hats. And she always had to smile and answer people's questions to
the tune of that smile.

Then when changing behind the screen in Auntie's tiny dressing room, she
had to be careful with the clothes--very careful. If lace should tear or
a frock become soiled, Auntie would not be able to sell it. It was a
careful little girl who changed behind that screen.

[Illustration: SHE HAD TO BE CAREFUL WITH THE CLOTHES]

But Jeanne would always answer Auntie as she smiled into her worried
eyes, "No, no, dear Auntie Sue. Never am I sad. Never do I mind the
work. It is play, you know. All the other little children envy me!"

This also was true. Many children did think what fun it would be to wear
all those lovely clothes and step about that gay little shop.

Some even went home and tried to imitate Jeanne. They thought it was
fun. They did not know it was hard, hard work.

Jeanne answered Auntie Sue this way and really meant what she said.

Still Jeanne often wished for the days to be much longer. Jeanne wanted
to play.

It was all right for those other children to play at being Jeanne. But
really to be Jeanne was not play!

When those other children wearied of their game of being Jeanne they
stopped. Jeanne could never stop. And there was never any time left
for her to play.

Auntie Sue often noticed that Jeanne's eyes held a wistful look. Auntie
Sue mistook that wistfulness and thought Jeanne was longing to possess
the beautiful clothes she showed.

She thought that Jeanne was sad because, each day, she would have to
take off those lovely clothes and put on her own simple little dresses.

It was only natural for Auntie to suppose this because Jeanne loved and
caressed each new garment that Auntie made. She seemed always so happy
to put them on.

But here is a secret: Jeanne never once thought about those clothes
after she took them off. She liked her little gingham dresses just as
well.

In fact, Jeanne would not have cared one bit what she wore, if only she
could have played. Auntie Sue did not know that.




CHAPTER VII

MAJOR d'ARTROT


One morning Major d'Artrot (daer-tr[=o]) received a letter from an old
friend. It was a good friend: Madame Villard. Madame Villard wrote that
she expected to spend a night at the Major's inn.

A tiny tumbled farm was Major d'Artrot's Inn. Before the war it had been
his fine and prosperous home. But the Major had been obliged to turn his
home into a hotel. For the war had made him a poor man.

Fighting and scenes of horror had taken place on that peaceful farm. It
had been occupied by the Germans. Later a terrible battle, one of the
famous battles of the Argonne, had been fought there.

[Illustration: THE BLOODY TREE]

In the Major's garden stands the "Bloody Tree." The name is enough to
tell what happened beneath its tall branches. A pole with wires still
stands outside the Major's house. It is a telegraph pole raised by the
American soldiers during the war. When the war was over, people came to
see the Major's farm. People were curious, interested. There was the
cellar where some poor souls had lived for weeks, listening to the
booming of the battles in the woods near-by.

[Illustration: AMERICAN TELEGRAPH WIRES IN THE MAJOR'S GARDEN]

There were the German helmets captured during that last battle. There
were many, many reasons why travelers were drawn to Major d'Artrot's
farm. So Major d'Artrot turned his house into a hotel. One of his
dearest friends was Madame Villard. She had helped make life easier for
the Major and for his little brood.

During the long years following the death of her son, the Major had
tried to help the stricken mother in her search for her lost
granddaughter.

He had at last gathered for her the information that on that famous
march an old peasant had been seen with a baby. Some one had seen him.
But he had fallen on the weary march. They knew that.

But they did not know about the baby. Nobody could tell Madame Villard
what had happened to the baby.

To-day the Major received Madame Villard's letter.

"Poor Madame!" he sighed, as he finished reading. "She does not give up
hope, even through all these years."

And he thought of the little black figure which soon would step from the
big, glossy car. She would take what comfort this poor family could
provide. She would make happy the Major's children with gifts and toys.
Her simple room would be generously paid for.

Then Madame would leave them, and to the near-by cemetery she would go.
She would visit it, before starting the journey homeward to Paris and to
her little Margot. Usually these visits of Madame Villard occurred after
a tour of the country. Those tours took her into very many villages of
France, and always for the same purpose--always for a possible sign, a
tiny clue of her lost grandchild.

"Madame is here," called the Major's youngest. "The big bright car is
outside. See! Madame is coming in."

A flock of eager youngsters gathered about the little lady. She kissed
them all and then sat down in the coolness of the Major's hallway.

"I have traveled far," she told the Major, after they were settled
comfortably. The Major's children were outside in their arbor opening
wonderful packages.

The Major's children were not starved for play. True, Madame Villard
was the only one who gave them shop toys. But their playthings were the
brooks of the forest, the little farm animals, and sticks and stones.

[Illustration: MAJOR d'ARTROT AND HIS FAMILY]

Happy little d'Artrots! The Major did not worry because they were so
poor. They had plenty of time for play.

"Through Verdun (v[)e]r-d[)u]n') and Reims (r[=e]mz) and the valley of
the Meuse (m[=u]z) I have traveled, dear Major d'Artrot," said Madame
Villard. "My travels have now become a habit. There is surely no more
hope. But on and on I go."

[Illustration: REIMS CATHEDRAL]

Major d'Artrot took her hand. "You must not say that, dear Madame," he
answered. "There is always hope. And remember what joy you bring with
your visits to us. We are always so glad to see you."

Madame thanked the Major and smiled.

"You are kind," she said. "I am always happy here with you and with
your little dear ones. But this time my visit is to be short. I must
leave for Paris to-morrow."

"So soon? That is a pity," the Major said.

"No," smiled Madame Villard. "My little Margot's birthday is coming
soon. I have promised to return and see to a very important part of her
celebration."

Madame Villard's eyes were now twinkling. "Can you guess what that very
important part might be for a young miss and her birthday?"

"No, I am afraid I do not know," the Major said.

"Well, dear Major, the young miss is to have a party frock which
Grandmother will give her. Now do you admit that is a most important
part of any young lady's birthday celebration?"

"Yes," laughed Major d'Artrot, "very important and serious!"

Then Major d'Artrot pulled a little card out of his pocket and showed it
to Madame.

"And since Mademoiselle (m[.a]d-mw[.a]-z[)e]l') Margot is to have a
beautiful frock," he said, "why do you not take her to this old friend
of mine who makes some of the loveliest frocks in Paris?"

Madame Villard read the card and then looked up at the Major
questioningly.

[Illustration: VERDUN]

He continued, "Suzanne Moreau lived in the village adjoining my farm
before that village was destroyed by the enemy. She was a demure little
dressmaker, and we knew her, my wife and I, as a kindly and lonely soul.
Now as you see by this card, she has established a fashionable
children's shop in your Paris. She is still a kindly, modest little
woman. Her whole life is centered in that small niece of hers, Jeanne,
who is called the 'Little Model.' Have you, perhaps, heard of her?"

[Illustration: THE MEUSE]

Madame Villard nodded and looked again at the card.

"Auntie Sue's Shop," she read.

"Yes, indeed," she answered, "I have heard. But Margot and I have never
been to the shop. Now since I know that they are friends of yours, we
will surely go."

"Ah, you are kind," said the Major. "Auntie Sue deserves what little one
can do to help. She is struggling alone and works very hard. I assure
you, dear Madame Villard, that she is a most deserving and honest
person."

"I believe that," smiled Madame, patting the Major's hand. "For to be a
friend of yours, one is obliged to be deserving, honest, and kind."




CHAPTER VIII

THE GUIGNOL


Auntie Sue watched Jeanne as she skipped along to school. There could
not possibly have been a happier skip. There could not possibly have
been a happier little face than the one Auntie Sue had just kissed.

But yet as Jeanne turned the corner, Auntie Sue felt something sad
inside of her.

Something said to her, "She is not really happy. Other children are
happy, but Jeanne is not a child. She is a puppet--a puppet."

Suzanne rushed into the shop and tried to shut out those thoughts. And
Jeanne skipped along to school.

Strange to say, Jeanne was thinking of puppets, too. But she was not
thinking of them in the same way as was Auntie Sue.

She was thinking of the puppet show in the park. This puppet show is
called a Guignol (g[=e]n'-y[=o]l) in France and the park where it is
played is the Champs Elysees.

On nearly every corner of this beautiful park is a Guignol. Where there
is no Guignol, there is a swing, or there are donkeys to ride or goat
carts. Children are amused in Paris.

[Illustration: THE GUIGNOL]

Jeanne often passed the park, but the amusements there were not for
her. Jeanne had no time for Guignols and donkeys and goat carts.
Jeanne had to go to school and from school to help Auntie in the shop.

The donkeys and swings and other amusements did not attract Jeanne so
much. But oh, how she loved the Guignol! Very often she would stop
outside the tall gates and watch for ever so short a time.

And when the children cried out, "There he is! There he is!" as they do
when the wicked policeman pops up his puppet head, Jeanne would shout
with them.

She loved those silly little puppets. She knew them all just by passing
them each day.

There was Guignol, the bad boy. He was the one all the children loved.
There was the policeman; and how they hated him! There was a funny lady
with a wobbly hat, which was always knocked off; and her hair would all
fall down.

There were others. There was a pale, very pale boy they called Pierrot
(py[)e]-r[=o]') which, in French, means "clown."

Jeanne felt sorry for him because he was very old and paintless and
torn. They never gave him a fresh coat of paint nor mended his suit.
Poor Pierrot!

Jeanne knew those stories by heart, too. There was the story of the
milkman. The bad boy drinks all the milkman's milk, while sending him
on useless errands.

There was "The Mattress," the story in which Guignol has a dream right
up on the tiny stage. Guignol, by the way, is just like our American
Punch, a puppet of the Punch and Judy show.

There were a few other stories, but they were always the same. Jeanne
thought of many new stories. She wondered why the children didn't grow
tired of having the same stories all the time. Jeanne could make up
others--and she did--while she skipped to school. She made them up while
she walked about the shop showing Auntie's little models.

To-day was a very fine day. When school was over, Jeanne found a group
of children in bright-colored clothes, watching the Guignol. How sweet
and pretty they looked sitting under the trees in their dainty clothes!

Jeanne leaned against a tree. It was early yet. She might watch one
Guignol play.

[Illustration: JEANNE LEANED AGAINST A TREE]

The play was "The Thief." Guignol gives a lady a rose. She puts it in
her hair under the large, floppy hat.

Then Guignol dances for her. It is a clumsy dance, and he trips. The
children laugh. He gallops clumsily off the stage. Pierrot tiptoes in
from the other side.

Jeanne leans forward eagerly. Has Pierrot a new suit, new paint? No,
he is shabby and pale. Ah, poor Pierrot! But he dances on tiptoes, so
light is he.

His dance is elfin and gay. The lady watches. She is enchanted. Pierrot
flits about the stage. Then, when his dance is at an end, he snatches
the rose from the lady's hair. The lady's wobbly hat falls off. The
lady's wobbly hair falls down. She is a sorry sight.

But who is that entering on the side? It is Guignol! He marches up to
Pierrot, and there is a fight. The children scream. The children cry
out. Pierrot is losing.

"Ah, Guignol! Guignol!" the children cry.

Their hero is winning.

Pierrot is thrown, and he lands far away from the stage. He lands on the
ground, but the children do not mind.

They are all absorbed in Guignol--their Guignol. He is kissing the lady
now.

But not for long are they happy. The alligator comes gliding upon the
stage. There is another battle, and Guignol vanquishes the alligator.

Then indeed is Guignol a hero. The curtain falls to the pleased applause
of the young audience.

Only Jeanne has noticed Pierrot. He lies in a heap on the ground. Nobody
has come to fetch him.

Time goes on, and as the sun sinks lower, more and more children leave
the park. The Guignol plays are over for the day. The men who make them
are packing to go.

Now everyone is gone but Jeanne. Jeanne and the Pierrot are alone. The
little girl goes up to the puppet.

"They have forgotten you, Pierrot," she says softly, "but maybe they do
not care."

Then Jeanne sits down on a bench with Pierrot in her arms.

"But come, come. You must not mind, Pierrot, if they do not love you.
You must not mind if they throw you aside and clap for Guignol. See! I
love you very much. And even if you do wear shabby clothes and your
paint is dull, that does not matter."

Jeanne rocks the Pierrot. It grows dark in the Champs Elysees.

"You must not mind. See, Pierrot!" she says. "See my dress and coat and
cap? They are as shabby as yours. But I do not mind. You see, we are
both the same. But I feel sorry because you do not dance more and
because you are never the hero of the plays. Guignol is an awkward,
clumsy fellow. It is you who are my hero, Pierrot."

As she talks, Jeanne's voice grows soft and drowsy. Jeanne's head nods,
and her eyes close. A soft breeze begins to stir in the trees. Jeanne is
asleep.




CHAPTER IX

AN ADVENTURE IN THE BOIS


Jeanne and Pierrot were walking through the Bois de Boulogne (bwae' d[~e]
b[=oo]'-l[=o]n'). That is a beautiful wood in Paris where children and
grown people play and walk and go boating on silvery lakes.

[Illustration: THE BOIS DE BOULOGNE]

Jeanne and Pierrot walked in the Bois (bwae), hand in hand. Pierrot was
not crying any more, though it had taken Jeanne a long time to soothe
him. She told him of the many stories she would make up. She told him of
the many fine adventures he would have as the hero of these stories.

Jeanne now had a story in her mind. And she was taking Pierrot to a
quiet spot where she could tell him about it.

"Sit here beside me, Pierrot," she said at last.

They had found a sylvan dell that might have been in the heart of
fairy-land, instead of in the heart of a big city like Paris.

"Now, listen, Pierrot," said Jeanne. "I am going to tell you a very fine
story. You and I shall be the actors in it. I shall be Joan of Arc and
you shall be my knight.

"You know that Joan of Arc was only a little girl when she heard the
call to save her country. She rode a big horse at the head of an army.

"She marched against the enemy with a sword in her hand. But my story
says that without her brave knight she could not have won the battle."

Pierrot's shirt puffed out. His little clown cap went up in the
air--puff!--and came down again on his head. He was very proud indeed.
Jeanne was pleased because she had made him happy.

"Now see! We shall begin our story and I am hearing the call."

Jeanne stood; but first she picked up a long stick from the ground. The
stick turned into a sword--a glittering sword.

Jeanne was dressed in shining steel armor. Pierrot's tiny clown suit
changed to a coat of mail. They were ready for the battle.

"Forward, my brave men of France," called Joan of Arc. And the little
puppet saluted Jeanne. But Jeanne cried, "My horse! Where is my horse?"

A large statue appeared before them. It was the iron statue of a horse.
It was twice the size of a real horse.

Jeanne tried to mount. She could not. She was too small. The horse was
too high. But Pierrot mounted. With a graceful leap, he was upon the
charger's back. Then down he flew and offered Jeanne his hand. Up flew
the puppet, and Jeanne flew with him.

They sat upon the iron charger. Slowly he moved his joints, and then
off, off he galloped with the little girl and the puppet.

All the time Jeanne was brandishing her sword. She was Joan of Arc and
she was riding at the head of her army of France as Joan of Arc had done
long, long ago.

"Wait, wait!" called a voice. A policeman was running after them through
the Bois. "Stop! You have stolen a statue from the park. Bring back the
iron horse!"

He was so little--that policeman--and the horse was so big that they did
not mind him.

"He is only a policeman," said Jeanne to Pierrot. "He is always clubbed
and kicked in the Guignol plays."

Pierrot laughed, and pop!--part of his armor burst!

"Oh, he is a wicked, wicked policeman," said Jeanne. "The children
always hate him in the Guignol plays."

So away from the policeman they galloped.

But wait! Look! The policeman has grown, and he is now as tall as the
horse! The club he carries has grown, too, and he clubs the iron horse.
It makes a terrible noise, and the horse stops.

Knock! Knock! Knock!

"Wake up, little one!" says a gruff voice.

Jeanne opens her eyes and looks into the face of a policeman standing
over her in the park. She has been asleep on the bench, with the little
puppet Pierrot in her arms.

It is very dark in the park. It is night.

"Come," says the policeman. "Tell me where you live, little one."

Oh, the terrible policeman of the Guignol plays! Jeanne remembers how
the children hate him, and she tries to run away.

But the policeman catches hold of her arm. It seems to Jeanne that his
face is kind.

"Come, little one! Do not be afraid of me. I am the friend of the
children. Tell me where you live and let me take you home," he says.

It was very dark in the park, but as they walked through the city
streets, the lights made everything as bright as day.

Jeanne and the policeman and Pierrot came to the door of Auntie Sue's
Shop. When the policeman handed Jeanne to Auntie Sue, the little girl
could not help wondering why the children hate the policeman in the
Guignol plays.

"Oh, Jeanne, my little one, ma cherie! Where have you been?" cried
Auntie Sue.

It was quite evident that poor Auntie Sue had been worried ill. She
caught the little dreamer and the puppet into her arms. She hugged them
so tightly that Jeanne thought they would both be crushed. Jeanne was
more concerned about Pierrot than about herself, though, for he was so
little and frail.

Then Auntie put Jeanne to bed with Pierrot beside her, his face peering
out from the covers.

And when Auntie had left them alone, Jeanne whispered to her little
puppet friend, "Pierrot, the policeman shall not be bad in our stories!
He is good, you see. In our stories you shall be the hero. The policeman
shall be a kind man who loves children. Guignol shall be the wicked one,
and you shall kick and beat him."

Pierrot did not move. Jeanne was awake now, you see. And puppets do not
move by themselves when children are awake.

But Jeanne thought she saw his eyes twinkle and his nose wriggle just
the least bit, before she popped off to sleep.




CHAPTER X

THE LIVE PUPPET


After Auntie left Jeanne and the Pierrot asleep in bed that night, she
went into her own room and sat down by her little table. She shaded her
eyes with her hands and thought very hard.

Poor Auntie Sue was unhappy. There was a little voice inside of her that
never would be still. This voice talked and talked and talked. No one
could hear it but Auntie Sue. It was not a person, nor was it a fairy.
Yet it was there, and it talked to Auntie Sue.

People call that voice Conscience. You see, many other people beside
Auntie Sue have heard that voice. He is known to everyone who does
wrong.

And Auntie Sue had done great wrong. Not knowing it, she had been doing
a great wrong all these years she had kept Jeanne from her rightful
home. And now that voice called Conscience was tormenting her.

To-night he was talking more loudly and more fiercely than he had ever
talked before. As Auntie Sue sat before her little table, he did not
leave her a moment's peace.

[Illustration: JEANNE SHOWING A NEW FROCK]

"You see what has happened," he said inside of Auntie Sue. "You see what
you have done by keeping Jeanne from Madame Villard. She is starved for
play.

"You have made her a poor little girl who has to work. If she lived in
the lovely apartment house with her grandmother, she could play and play
and play."

Suzanne clapped her hands over her ears to stop the voice. But
Conscience came from her heart and did not need her ears to hear him.

He went right on, "What would that soldier say? What would the old man
say? What would the grandmother say? And Major d'Artrot?"

"Oh, Major d'Artrot, my good, my honest friend!" sobbed Suzanne.

She thought of her only friend in all the world. She would never dare to
confess to him what she had done!

She opened her drawer and looked at the picture in the locket. She read
again the name and address which had been pinned to the baby's skirt so
many years ago: "Madame Villard. Avenue Champs Elysees."

[Illustration: SHE READ AGAIN THE NAME AND ADDRESS]

The face of Jeanne's father looked back at her. It seemed to her that
his eyes were accusing her.

"You have kept her from her rightful home and from the pleasures of
childhood," went on the voice. And the face in the locket seemed to
agree with the voice.

"To-night the child stayed in the park with a puppet--the only play toy
she has ever had. She fell asleep in front of the Guignol, where happy
children go to clap and laugh. But you give Jeanne no time for play
and laughter."

It was all true. But Suzanne knew that if Jeanne stopped showing the
clothes she made, her audience would cease to be interested. If she did
not draw her audience, she could not sell the clothes. And if she did
not sell the clothes, she could not support Jeanne.

It was all quite terrible for Auntie Sue. And she dared not mention it
to a soul. Nobody knew that Jeanne did not belong to her. Nobody knew
Jeanne's story, not even the Major.




CHAPTER XI

LITTLE SPOILED MARGOT


"Grandmother! Grandmother! Home again! How glad I am!"

Little Margot threw herself into Madame Villard's arms, and the old lady
hugged her close.

"Yes, my little Margot. Grandmother comes back for one splendid
occasion!"

"Ah, my birthday," smiled Margot.

And then Grandmother and Margot planned for that birthday. It was
strange how Margot did not like so many things.

When Grandmother mentioned a theater party, the little girl shook her
dark head.

"No, it is not what I like," she said.

Then Grandmother suggested a trip to the zoo with a party of girls and
boys.

"No, I do not like the zoo!" Margot pouted.

"A Guignol party, cherie?" asked Grandmother.

"Ah, no! They are so stupid!" complained Margot.

And Grandmother smiled and shook her head.

"My Margot is a little bit spoiled, perhaps," she observed.

Margot was not a little bit, but a great big bit spoiled. Grandmother
and Mother had both spoiled her, from the day she was born.

Mother was nearly always with Father and Margot saw little of her. When
they were together Mother would kiss and hug a great deal and sometimes
she would cry. There were always gifts in Mother's room for Margot.

And when Mother brought her into Father's room, he, too, would pet and
caress her and give her toys or candy. Poor, helpless Father! He loved
to see his little girl. It made his dull eyes brighten when she came
into the room.

He would say to Mother after Margot had left, "Has the sun gone under a
cloud, Marie? It seems darker to me."

You see, he felt sunshine while his little daughter was there.

But the nurse would not allow frequent visits. Ah, Father might never be
allowed to forget that bitter war!

So Grandmother played guardian to Margot. And a loving and indulgent
guardian was she!

Margot could play from morning until night if she wanted to, except, of
course, for school hours.

The nursery was filled with costly toys. They did not interest little
Margot any more. There were so many of them.

In fact, little spoiled Margot was not interested in anything, because
she had too much.

"Ah, well, cherie," said Grandmother, "you will think of something that
Grandmother can do for your birthday. But to-morrow we shall go to buy
the little party frock which I promised you."

Frocks were of no more interest to Margot than toys. She had too many of
those, also. So she hardly listened to Grandmother's last remark.

"I am going to take you to a shop where a little girl shows clothes to
the people who come to buy--a real little model. You might call her a
live puppet. My cherie will enjoy that, will she not?" asked Grandmother
eagerly, hoping to interest the child in a new pleasure.

Evidently the idea did bring with it something new and exciting to
Margot.

For she turned and asked, "And does this little girl really walk about
and pose, as people do on the stage?"

"Yes, cherie. So I hear," answered Madame Villard.

"A live puppet!"

Margot clapped her hands, and Grandmother was pleased to see her joy.

Then her face fell, she turned to Grandmother and said slowly, "Oh, what
a lucky little girl she is!"




CHAPTER XII

AT AUNTIE SUE'S SHOP


"The people are waiting! Hurry, Jeanne!" called Auntie to the little
girl at the back of the screen.

Jeanne sat with Pierrot before her, and both were dressed in splendor.
The little girl had on a new frock of Auntie Sue's.

Her dark hair made a charming frame for her little oval face under the
yellow poke bonnet, of old-fashioned shape. She wore an old-fashioned
dress. It was yellow, with hand-painted flowers and a velvet bow.

And Pierrot! Ah, Pierrot, too, was fine in a new satin suit and cap,
with bright red cheeks which Jeanne had painted. Many exciting
adventures were happening there behind the screen to the little
yellow-gowned girl and the clown in satin.

Jeanne was not thinking of this new frock of Auntie's which she wore,
nor of the big Saturday audience out in the shop waiting for her to
appear. She was thinking of her latest play for Pierrot. As Auntie
called, Jeanne put the puppet down and, smoothing the dainty dress, she
stepped out into the bright little shop room.

All about were seated ladies and children. The children were in smart
attire, with interested and curious little faces that peered and stared
at the live puppet as she walked about.

As Jeanne passed a little girl with hair and eyes as dark as her own and
a wistful look, the gray-haired lady sitting beside the little girl
stopped Jeanne.

"What a beautiful frock!" she said, and touched the hem of the garment
gently.

[Illustration: "WHAT A BEAUTIFUL FROCK!" SHE SAID]

Jeanne and the little girl looked at each other.

Auntie Sue came over to them.

Madame Villard smiled at the dressmaker and asked, "Do you think that
this style would become my little granddaughter?"

Suzanne looked quickly at Margot. Margot's big brown eyes were
fastened eagerly upon the child whom she had called a lucky little girl.

"Yes, Madame," answered Auntie Sue. "With her brown eyes and slight
figure, the little mademoiselle should wear the frock as well as Jeanne
does."

Madame and Auntie Sue then talked for some time about the frock.

Jeanne went about the large audience, with Margot's wondering eyes
following her every movement.

At last Jeanne finished showing all the garments. The young model
disappeared behind the screen, and the audience began to leave.

Auntie Sue was showing a closet full of clothes to Madame Villard whose
many purchases made the pencil of Auntie Sue skip over the page and her
heart skip with gladness.

This was, of course, dull for Margot, and Margot was not used to things
being dull. She sat in the empty room, while Grandmother talked and
looked at clothes and paid no attention to her.

The little girl began to walk about the shop. She peered at the floppy
dolls on the tables and at the quaint hat stands and show-cases.

She came to the screen behind which Jeanne had disappeared. She longed
to peep behind that screen. She edged up close and tried to look through
the cracks to the back.

She heard a tiny sound. Then words: "Down with the Bastille
(b[.a]s-t[=e]l')!"

Margot pressed her head against the screen to hear better. The screen
began to topple. Over it went. There was a muffled sound, and Jeanne
stood up and faced Margot.

Jeanne was now in her own simple clothes. She held the Pierrot puppet,
who was, however, still grandly dressed.

She stared hard at Margot and then at the fallen screen. Margot stared,
too. Then Margot managed to remember her manners.

"Excuse me," she said. "I did not mean to knock down the screen."

Jeanne smiled and picked up the screen, while Margot helped her set it
in place. When it again stood erect, Margot found herself outside and
Jeanne inside. They were separated as before.

For a few moments there was silence from both sides of the screen. Then
came a giggle from one side and a giggle from the other.

And then from the outside, "May I come back and see you?"

From the inside, "Yes, do come!"

Margot went behind the screen, and for the first time in her life she
learned the magic of real play.

Jeanne had one plaything: a little forsaken puppet. But with love and
tenderness she made him a hero.

Jeanne told Margot about Pierrot. She told that he was no longer the
buffoon--the poor mistreated clown. He was now a hero.

He could play a knight or a king--Napoleon! She told Margot that Pierrot
was Napoleon in one of her plays and that she was Joan of Arc.

Margot lived in another world for the space of an hour. Then the two
little girls were called back suddenly by a voice from the room.

"Margot, Margot! Child! Where are you?"

Grandmother was looking for her.

Margot and Jeanne stepped out from behind the screen and found
Grandmother preparing to leave. Auntie Sue stood beside her with pencil
and pad.

"Thank you, Madame," said Auntie Sue gratefully, "for your splendid
order to-day. It was indeed kind of you to make so many purchases at my
little shop."

Madame answered, "I am truly pleased with your charming wares, my dear
Mademoiselle Moreau. Besides, you know, my dear friend Major d'Artrot is
also a friend of yours."

"But Madame," said Auntie Sue, as the grandmother and her little Margot
started out of the door, "I have not yet taken your name. I do not
know--."

"Of course, of course," laughed Madame Villard. "How very forgetful of
me! Please write my name and address, so you will know where to send the
little things."

Suzanne seated herself at a tiny desk and, with pencil poised, looked up
at the sweet face above her.

Madame dictated: "Madame Paul Villard. Avenue Champs Elysees."

The pencil dropped from Auntie Sue's hand. Her head fell forward. Jeanne
rushed over to the little desk and caught Auntie Sue as she was about to
fall.

"Auntie, Auntie dear, what is the matter?" she cried.

Little Margot picked up the pencil while both children and Madame
Villard hovered over the desk.

Suzanne rested her head on her hand and whispered, "It is all right. I
am all right now. I was only a bit faint. Oh, I am so sorry, dear
Madame."

[Illustration: "IT IS ALL RIGHT. I AM ALL RIGHT NOW--"]

Auntie Sue was soon up upon her sprightly little feet again. Smilingly
she bowed Madame and her granddaughter out of the door. But when they
had left the shop, Suzanne went to her room, and Jeanne did not see her
again that day.




CHAPTER XIII

COME AND PLAY


Margot took off the telephone receiver and asked for a number. It was
early next morning, and the child was not yet dressed.

She was in kimono and slippers and had tiptoed into the living room.

"Hello," said a voice at the other end of the wire.

"Hello," said Margot. "I want to speak with Jeanne, if you please."

Margot had talked of nothing but Jeanne from the time she had left the
shop. She had fallen asleep last night to the tune of Pierrot dreams,
fiery steeds, and gallant armored knights.

Grandmother promised that she might ask Jeanne to play with her to-day.
They would go for a long drive. They would go to the park and to the
Guignol. There was nobody like Jeanne--nobody that Margot had ever met.

"Is this Jeanne?" asked Margot, as the little girl's voice came over the
telephone.

"Yes."

"This is Margot. Can you go out with me to-day? I shall call for you at
two."

It was a command, but little Margot was not aware of that. She did not
mean it that way. She only meant to have what she wanted, as she usually
did.

"But I must first ask Auntie," Jeanne replied.

"Oh, she will let you go," declared Margot. "You may tell her that we
shall take care of you and bring you back safely."

Margot waited while Jeanne ran to Auntie's room. Jeanne had not seen
Auntie since the afternoon before, when she had so mysteriously
disappeared in her room after her fainting spell. Jeanne found Auntie a
pale and worried Auntie this morning.

"Oh, Auntie dear," cried Jeanne, throwing her arms about Suzanne's neck,
"you are not well."

Suzanne assured the child that she was quite well, and so she was. The
only trouble was with the little man who is nothing but a voice and is
called Conscience. He had been talking to her all night and keeping her
awake.

When Jeanne told what Madame Villard's grandchild wanted, it seemed that
Suzanne flinched at the name.

But she smiled and answered, "Yes, dear. Tell her you will go. It will
be so nice for you. And to-day is Sunday. There is no work."

Jeanne was only a child, and she longed to go with her new little
friend. She longed to ride in the big motor and to play. But she
hesitated just for a minute.

"You are sure you will not need me, dear Auntie?" she asked.

"Run along and tell the little girl you are coming," laughed Auntie Sue.

When Jeanne closed the door behind her, Suzanne Moreau's smile faded.
She held her throbbing head in her two hands.

How she longed to tell some one of her sufferings! If only she dared
confide her story to the Major!

But she valued that honorable gentleman's friendship so much that she
feared to lose it by admitting what she now felt to be her terrible
crime. Conscience was making her think that--Conscience, together with
the face in the locket!

And now Jeanne was going out with little Margot--her own cousin! Margot
would take her in a beautiful car. Margot would wear beautiful
clothes. They would play with beautiful toys.

Ah, poor little Jeanne! It was hard for Suzanne, with these thoughts, to
keep a smiling face until Jeanne had left with Margot.




CHAPTER XIV

A DRIVE THROUGH PARIS


Through Paris in a fine motor car! How often Jeanne had seen these same
sights! But now how splendid it all seemed to the little girl, as she
sat beside Margot, with Pierrot firmly clasped in her hand! For Pierrot
had been invited, too. I doubt whether Margot would have welcomed Jeanne
as heartily without Pierrot. Pierrot was half of the performance.

They rode through Paris. They passed the Place de la Concorde (plaes
d[)e] lae kon-kord'), that most beautiful of city squares, where a sight
not so beautiful once stood. It was here that the guillotine had stood.
It is the terrible instrument which beheaded so many people in those
frightful, stormy days of old.

[Illustration: THEY PASSED THE PLACE DE LA CONCORDE]

The square was then called Place de la Revolution (plaes d[)e] lae
r[)e]v-[=o]-l[=u]'-sy[=o]n). But now the name, "Place de la Concorde,"
means "Place of Peace."

They crossed bridges. There are thirty-two bridges in Paris. Some of
these are very beautiful. Curiously, the oldest of these, a bridge begun
in 1578, is called Pont Neuf (pon nuf), which means "New Bridge."

They passed the Louvre (l[=oo]'-vr'), once a palace. It is now the
largest museum in the world. Here such famous works of art as the
Venus de Milo (v[=e]'-nus d[)e] m[=e]'-l[=o]) and the Mona Lisa
(m[=o]'-nae l[=e]'-zae) are to be seen.

[Illustration: THE LOUVRE--THE LARGEST MUSEUM IN THE WORLD]

The Arc de Triomphe (aerk d[)e] tr[=e]'-onf') stands as a memorial to the
great victories of the French general, Napoleon I. It is an arch of
splendor set in the center of branching wide avenues.

[Illustration: THE ARC DE TRIOMPHE]

For Paris is a city noted for beauty. It was planned and built and
dreamed, while most other cities, like Topsy, the colored girl, "just
growed."

Paris, with its avenues lined with trees, its wide streets and spacious
parks, did not "just grow." It was a dream before it was built, and now
it is that dream realized.

The little girls passed the spot where the Bastille once stood. This
was the famous prison into which people were thrown by the French kings,
usually without fair trial. But one day the Parisians marched against
the Bastille and burned it to the ground.

[Illustration: THE SPOT WHERE ONCE STOOD THE BASTILLE]

The little girls passed the Tuileries (tw[=e]l-r[=e]'), which are
fairy-like gardens. They are a children's paradise, and part of the
dream that Paris is.

[Illustration: THE TUILERIES--FAIRY-LIKE GARDENS AND CHILDREN'S
PARADISE]

Margot and Jeanne watched the people sitting outside of cafes on the
streets. They watched the fashionable strollers along the boulevards.

For Paris is well dressed, both inside and out. French cooking is an
art, as is everything that these art-loving people attempt.

At the end of their happy day the little girls drove to the park. They
sat upon a bench beneath shady trees and they watched a Guignol play.

They had chatted and laughed and now were the very best of friends.
Margot was a happy little girl that day. She had learned from Jeanne how
to play.

"Sit still, Pierrot," scolded Jeanne softly so that only Margot might
hear.

"Pierrot, you shall never come again if you do not behave!" continued
Jeanne.

Margot was laughing, for she could see Pierrot bouncing up and down on
the bench. Of course the other children couldn't see it, but Jeanne told
Margot about it. So she could see plainly what this naughty puppet was
doing.

"Oh, dear!" whispered Jeanne to Margot. "He will do something dreadful
when Guignol comes on the stage. You know he cannot bear Guignol!"

There now was an ugly, red-nosed clown in the play. He had taken
Pierrot's place after that day when poor Pierrot had been abandoned.

"Here comes Guignol!" exclaimed Margot.

Guignol slid upon the stage and fell flop!--on his nose. Guignol began
to dance. But again he tripped over his big feet and landed puff!--on
his stomach.

He stood up, grunting and groaning and puffing, and again he danced.

Margot and Jeanne watched Pierrot bouncing up and down. Jeanne had to
catch Pierrot's hat each time it flew off, as it did whenever Guignol
fell down on the stage.

Pierrot's hair stood up like wire, and the cap went up in the air. At
least, that is what Jeanne said it did!

When the fight came, they could not hold Pierrot. He kicked and squirmed
and waved his arms.

Jeanne was so shocked when his cap flew off and hit a gentleman in the
eye! Margot was embarrassed, too. They scolded and spanked Pierrot, but
it did no good.

"He wants to be in the play," whispered Jeanne. "I have spoiled him by
making him the hero, and now he cannot watch Guignol!"

The children were relieved when at last the play was over. They were
then able to take the unruly puppet away and bundle him into the car.

"My child always disgraces me! But we cannot blame him," said Jeanne,
shaking her head like a fond but troubled mother. "He was so abused
before, and now he has discovered what a great actor he is, and what a
hero!"

"Oh, but Pierrot is splendid!" answered Margot.

And pop!--went a button on Pierrot's suit. His chest puffed out, and his
hat flew off. The children laughed.

[Illustration: JEANNE AND MARGOT PLAYED IN THE CHAMPS ELYSEES]

When Margot left Jeanne at the door of Auntie Sue's Shop, she wanted to
know when they should be together again. She asked when they should play
more of Jeanne's stories with Pierrot.

Jeanne did not tell Margot that she would not be able to play again for
many days. Work would interfere. Work was always there to stop play.

But Jeanne did not say this to Margot. Margot would not have understood.
Jeanne only told her that she hoped they would meet soon again.

So with her puppet in her arms, she stepped out of the car. She stepped
out of the car and out of a different world from her own.

And Margot planned all the way home to repeat to-day's pleasures
to-morrow and to-morrow and to-morrow. Little, spoiled Margot!




CHAPTER XV

JEANNE AND MARGOT


Margot's to-morrow and again to-morrow with Jeanne did not come to pass.

Margot discovered she could not disturb the little girl's workaday life.
It greatly annoyed Margot that, for the first time in her life, she
could not wave her wand and command what she wished.

"I want her! I want to play with her!" exclaimed the pouting Margot,
stamping her foot.

She had just called Jeanne on the telephone. Jeanne had told her that
it would be impossible to go to the Guignol or play.

To-day was a week day, and from school Jeanne was obliged to hurry home
to help Auntie Sue in the shop.

"Come, Margot, child," pleaded Grandmother. "Do not fret. We shall take
another child to-day. Grandmother will telephone for you."

"They are all stupid! I want Jeanne!" insisted the little girl.

So Margot went to the Guignol with her nurse. She went again and again.
All the time, she thought of the happy day she had spent there with
Jeanne and Pierrot.

While Margot was watching the puppets one day, she noticed a child
standing outside the gate looking in. It was Jeanne.

Jeanne was coming home from school and, as she often did, was watching
Guignol's antics for a few brief moments.

Margot jumped up and, to the astonishment of her nurse, she ran over to
Jeanne.

"Jeanne, how happy I am to see you! Come in. Come! We shall see the
Guignol together," she cried.

[Illustration: "COME, JEANNE, WE SHALL SEE THE GUIGNOL TOGETHER"]

But Jeanne shook her head, and her eyes were sad.

"I should like to, Margot," she answered. "But Auntie is waiting. I must
go."

They stood there together for several moments. During those moments,
Margot caught once more the spell of Jeanne's play magic.

For Jeanne played always. She played while she talked or dressed or
walked. And while she watched the Guignol, her playing was always
splendid. Margot caught the spell.

Long after Jeanne had left she sat and played her own dream plays, while
the play of the Guignol went on in front of her. Often after that day,
Margot saw Jeanne hurrying home. But Jeanne never stopped again.

Jeanne often saw Margot after that day, but she hardly turned her head
toward the park. She kept hurrying on because she was afraid of the
tears that lived just behind her eyes when she passed the Guignol.

Those tears might at any moment break through the doors of her eyes. And
Margot must not see that!

As Margot watched Jeanne, she wondered whether, after all, the little
puppet was such a lucky little girl. She began to think of a really
lucky little girl whose name was Margot!

One day when Margot came home, she said to Grandmother, "Grandmother
dear, I have at last thought what you may give me on my birthday."

Grandmother took her hand.

"I am glad, cherie," she answered, "because the day is drawing near."

"If I may take Jeanne with me to the Bois and spend the day there, that
is all I wish," said Margot.

"And no party?" Grandmother looked surprised.

"No. I prefer that," said Margot.

Grandmother telephoned to Auntie Sue. It was arranged that Jeanne was to
be spared for that one day--Margot's birthday.

A day in the woods was planned with a picnic and a boat ride, but, best
of all, with Jeanne and Pierrot.

The morning of Margot's birthday arrived. As the little girl opened her
eyes, a dismal sight met them.

The gray sky was pouring down bucketsful of rain. The morning was as
gray and dark as a rainy morning can be. Margot saw her day in the woods
spoiled, and she started to cry.

But Grandmother arranged that Jeanne was to come to the apartment.

Margot's pout did not make of her a very happy looking birthday girl.
But she had to be satisfied with these plans.

"It would have been so nice to play in the Bois," she sulked.

"Yes, cherie," said Grandmother, "but we cannot change the weather."

And so in front of a crackling fire in Margot's toy stuffed nursery, the
two little girls spent the day.

Margot met Jeanne with, "Isn't it too bad?"

But Jeanne could find nothing to feel sorry about.

"Oh, what a beautiful fire!" she exclaimed.

And after a little while, Margot began to be glad that the day was
rainy, because Jeanne was glad.




CHAPTER XVI

"I WANT TO PLAY"


Auntie Sue worked very hard. She now had several large orders to fill.

She was finishing Madame Villard's order to-day, and she hoped to bring
the little dresses to the apartment that evening.

Jeanne was spending Margot's birthday at the Villard apartment. So
Suzanne determined to deliver the dresses and fetch Jeanne when the day
was over.

She worked steadily and tried to banish thoughts and voices inside of
her. Since Madame Villard's visit to the shop, Suzanne had not had a
moment's peace from Conscience.

It was only the thought that Jeanne really loved to show the pretty
clothes that kept Suzanne the least bit happy.

She answered Conscience thus: "But see how happy the child is when I
give her a new frock to show! She knows, too, that she is the envy of
every child in Paris!"

And Conscience always replied, "Perhaps. But maybe she is telling you
that. Maybe she is really like any other child who wants and needs to
play!"

This was the thing that always caused Auntie Sue to shudder. If she had
thought that Jeanne cared, she could never have gone on asking her to
work. She hoped that Jeanne did not like to play and did not mind being
different from other children.

Always this hope made Auntie Sue argue with the voice. You see, Auntie
Sue tried to believe that Jeanne was glad to be a live puppet!

Two little girls played and chatted before a crackling fire. While they
sat in Margot's cheerful, rosy room, they made journeys throughout the
land of France.

Stories and stories and stories!

Once Pierrot was a soldier, and they played the Great War. Margot and
Jeanne were nurses. Through battlefields of France they took their
fancies.

Margot had motored many times with Grandmother throughout the valley of
the war. She had passed villages, gray and ruined. She had passed
villages, new and shiny, with American flags flying beside the French.

[Illustration: AMERICAN FLAGS FLYING BESIDE THE FRENCH]

She had passed American cemeteries, with thousands of little white
crosses like snow upon the ground. There were brown crosses, too, and
huge stone monuments to soldiers.

[Illustration: AMERICAN CEMETERY NEAR ROMAGNE]

There was one monument built around a line of bayonets where a company
of soldiers had been buried alive by an enemy bomb. Their bayonets
still show above the ground.

[Illustration: HUGE STONE MONUMENT TO SOLDIERS]

She had seen great tanks along the roadside--barbed wire and trenches.

[Illustration: SHE HAD SEEN GREAT TANKS ALONG THE ROADSIDE]

Through beautiful France the little girl had journeyed with
Grandmother. Through the famous wine country--the lands of Burgundy
(bur'-g[)u]n-d[)i]), Champagne (sh[)a]m-p[=a]n'), and Dijon
(d[=e]-zhon'), the city of churches, palaces, and famous mustard they
journeyed!

Along the road sat women knitting or sorting and cleaning the cotton of
their mattresses. They were washing in little outdoor water troughs
along the roadway.

[Illustration: AN OLD WOMAN CLEANING THE COTTON OF A MATTRESS]

The children made a play for every part of France. They made one for
every French character they had ever heard about. Jeanne could weave a
play about anything, and Margot could not help saying, "What a pity you
do not have more time to play!"

At this moment the doorbell rang. Auntie Sue was ushered into the hall
by the Villard maid. Auntie Sue had come to deliver her parcel and to
fetch Jeanne.

"Madame Villard is not in," said the maid, "but the children are in the
nursery. Would you like to go to them?"

Thus it happened that Auntie Sue arrived at the nursery door in time to
hear the two little girls discussing a serious question.

Auntie Sue did not want to eavesdrop. She would not have listened to the
children if she could have helped herself. But the fact of the matter
was that Auntie Sue became rooted to the floor, and she could not move.

For the first thing she heard was Jeanne's voice saying, "Oh, Margot! I
hate all those silly clothes! I hate being a model. I want to be just a
little girl."

Jeanne's voice was bitter. Is it any wonder that Auntie Sue could not
move from the spot on which she was standing? She grasped the door knob
to keep herself from falling.

[Illustration: CHAMPAGNE VINEYARDS NEAR EPERNAY]

Then the conversation went on.

"Then why do you do it?" asked Margot's voice.

"Because," came Jeanne's, "I dare not tell Auntie. She works so hard
and takes such good care of me. You see, I have no mother and father."

There was silence, and then Jeanne's voice went on, "My papa was a
soldier. But Auntie does not know where he fell."

Again silence and then Margot said, "I think your aunt would let you
play if you would ask her to."

"No," Jeanne replied, "I would not ask her. I must show the clothes. She
could not sell them if I did not show them first."

There was a short silence and then again came Jeanne's voice, "I just
want to be a little girl. I want to play!" The last word ended in a sob.

For the next few moments Auntie Sue did not hear anything. Indeed she
hardly knew anything, so stunned and shocked was she.

Auntie Sue did not know how it was that she ever opened the door. She
did not know how she ever came to leave that apartment.

It was fortunate that Madame Villard and Margot's mother were out.
Children do not always notice things the way grown people do.

But Margot wondered, after Jeanne and her aunt had left, why Auntie
Sue's eyes had been so big and frightened and why she had hardly said
good-bye.




CHAPTER XVII

A CALL FOR HELP


Major d'Artrot called to his wife, "Come; see! A letter has arrived
which calls me to Paris. I must leave at once."

Madame d'Artrot read the letter.

    "Dear, dear Major d'Artrot," it said, "You are my only friend, and
    I must ask you to come to my aid. I am in trouble. I need help and
    I am ill. Please come to me.

                                                      Suzanne Moreau."

"Why, that is Auntie Sue," said Madame d'Artrot, a surprised note in her
voice. "She has such a successful shop, I am told. What can be the
matter?"

[Illustration: A DIJON MUSTARD SHOP]

"That is what I shall find out soon," answered the Major. And he made
hasty preparations to leave for Paris.

When Major d'Artrot returned to his farm two days later, he brought with
him a little girl.

Jeanne was a very white-faced little girl.

Major d'Artrot said, "I have brought little Jeanne to be our guest until
her aunt is better."

And all the little d'Artrots flocked about Jeanne and tried to make her
feel at home.

It was all so strange to little Jeanne from the city. She had been taken
away from Auntie--Auntie, who lay ill and needed her.

But the Major told her to come. He told her that Auntie wished her to
come with him. If Auntie wished it, Jeanne must go. But otherwise she
would never--could never--have left poor sick Auntie Sue.

Once outside in the fresh, pure country air, Jeanne began to forget a
little. With rabbits and dogs and cats about her and the merry
chattering of the Major's children, she could not help it.

Jeanne's eyes were alive, and her heart was gay. She was one of the
little fairies of play, and that kind of fairy cannot remain sad for
long.

Besides, the Major's children had games and playthings of which Jeanne
had never before heard. Even Pierrot was excited. It was all Jeanne
could do to hold him from jumping into the little stream.

Jeanne soon had the young d'Artrots acquainted with Pierrot. Indeed, the
young d'Artrots fell quite in love with sprightly Pierrot.

[Illustration: WASHING IN OUTDOOR WATER TROUGHS]

In the meantime the Major recounted to his wife the happenings which had
befallen him in Paris.

"Poor woman!" he told Madame d'Artrot, as he described Suzanne's
plight. "She is ill because of the wrong she committed so many years
ago. She could tell nobody about it.

"But she finally discovered that Jeanne was unhappy, and that was too
much for her to bear. She realized then that she was being punished for
her wrong. And so she decided that before it was too late she would
confess!"

"So she told you this terrible story?" asked Madame d'Artrot.

"Yes, and asked me to see Madame Villard," replied the Major.

"And when will you break this news to Madame?" the Major's wife
inquired.

"I have already done so," he answered quietly. "That is, I called upon
Madame Villard before leaving Paris. I told her that I had traced her
lost grandchild. I told her that I wished her to come to our home
to-morrow. But I did not tell her any more."

"Ah, poor Madame Villard! How happy I am for her! What a joy this will
be for her!" sighed Madame d'Artrot.

The Major smiled and agreed with his wife.

"And what a joy for this poor little play-starved child!" he said,
looking out of the window at the happy band of children.

They were romping and making the air ring with glad sounds.

The next morning Jeanne arose early. Being on a farm was something so
different and thrilling to this child of the city that every noise
outside her window seemed to call her.

She put on her little black apron and went out into the brisk country
air.

The farm animals greeted her, and the little stream gurgled good
morning. This was the most beautiful feeling that life had ever given
Jeanne.

She skipped about the farm, seeing and feeling and smelling the country,
freshness, and morning. It was beautiful.

And then she thought of Auntie Sue. Ah, poor Auntie Sue! If only she
could be here with Jeanne! If only they could forget that shop and come
to a place like this! Why hadn't Auntie Sue ever told her about places
like this?

As Jeanne's thoughts flew, her little feet flew, too. Soon she found
herself walking along the country road. New wonders met her eyes and
ears and nose with every step. Her sadness was nearly forgotten, until
she stopped.

There, in front of Jeanne, were countless crosses--crossed of white,
crosses of brown, all in rows.

Margot had told her about the soldiers' burying grounds in the Argonne
and in other places of France. This was a soldiers' burying ground.

[Illustration: THIS WAS A SOLDIERS' BURYING GROUND]

The little girl stood and wondered.

She wondered about her own soldier father.

Just then, a big motor car stopped not far away, and Jeanne watched a
black-gowned lady and child step out. They carried flowers in their
arms. They went to a little brown cross and they knelt.

The tears welled up in Jeanne's eyes. Ah, how she, too needed to pray!
How she needed a little brown cross to kneel to--to talk to!

Everything was making Jeanne cry. She was wondering again about Auntie
Sue. How strangely Auntie had acted! And she had sent Jeanne away!




CHAPTER XVIII

MARGOT'S STORY


"Come. Tell me. Quick!" Madame Villard breezed into the Major's house
with Margot following. They were both breathless, excited. "What have
you found out, dear Major? Tell me."

Major d'Artrot bade the eager grandmother be seated and rest herself.
Then he asked one of his own little girls to take Margot outside.

"We can't find the little girl," said the Major's eldest to Margot, when
they were outside in the garden. "When we came out this morning she was
gone."

"What little girl?" asked Margot.

"Why, Jeanne," said the Major's daughter. "That little girl from the
city. Papa brought her here last night."

When Margot learned that it was Jeanne--Auntie Sue's Jeanne, "the little
model"--she rushed into the house.

"Oh, Grandmother, Jeanne was here. But now she is gone," she cried.

The Major looked astonished.

Grandmother had been crying.

"What is that you say, my dear?" asked the Major. "She is gone?"

"Yes. The children cannot find her."

Then the Major left Grandmother and Margot alone, while he went out to
search for Jeanne.

And Grandmother held Margot very close, while she repeated the tale
that the Major had just told her.

"And so, my dear little Margot," she added, "Jeanne is your own cousin."

Margot could not speak. Her heart was too full. She only hugged
Grandmother like a little bear. Then, more like a swift jack rabbit, she
flew out of the house. She flew out in search of Jeanne, her own
cousin.

All the d'Artrots were looking for Jeanne, but Margot came upon her
first.

Jeanne was kneeling beside a crooked little brown cross. There were
flowers on it.

Jeanne had made the crooked little brown cross herself, and she was
praying. She had made it for her soldier daddy.

[Illustration: JEANNE WAS KNEELING BESIDE A CROOKED LITTLE BROWN CROSS]

Margot came up behind Jeanne.

"What are you doing, Jeanne?" she asked.

Jeanne thought she had never before seen Margot's face this way. It
seemed that Margot was about to cry, but not the usual Margot cry.

She was not acting spoiled. She was not commanding anything. She seemed
so sweet and kind and sympathetic.

"I--I was praying," said Jeanne. "But what are you doing here, Margot?"

Margot sat down beside the little, black-aproned figure and took
Jeanne's hand.

"I came to play with you, Jeanne," she said. "I came to tell you about a
new play."

Jeanne could not understand it at all.

With head bent, she whispered, "But Margot dear, I have not brought
Pierrot. We cannot play without Pierrot."

Margot answered, "We do not need Pierrot for this play. You see there
is only one heroine, and that is you."

Then Margot told a story to Jeanne--a curious story of a little baby who
was kept away from her grandmother and her cousin. Yes; the baby was
really kept for a number of years from a home of love and protection and
made to work. She had very little time to play. She did not even know
her real name. How could she? It had never been told to her.

[Illustration: THEN MARGOT TOLD A STORY TO JEANNE]

She told Jeanne of another little girl who lived in that home and had
everything. The other little girl could have played always but didn't
know how. She didn't know how to play until the first little girl came
and showed her how.

Then Margot told about a kind man who received a letter from a sick lady
telling what a terrible deed she had done.

The lady begged the kind man to take the little girl to his home in the
country and then to send for her grandmother and little cousin.

So he did. And when the grandmother and little cousin arrived, they
found that the child was Jeanne!

Jeanne started, and her eyes grew big and round.

Margot put her arm about Jeanne's shoulders. Just then they heard a
step.

There was Grandmother Villard standing among a group of young d'Artrots.
Grandmother left the group and came over to the two little girls.

She took Jeanne in her arms. She cried.

[Illustration: SHE TOOK JEANNE IN HER ARMS]

And then she said, "Jeanne, my little one! My own little grandchild!"

The d'Artrots left, and Jeanne and Margot and Grandmother sat together
for a long time. They sat silently.

But suddenly Jeanne exclaimed, "Oh, poor Auntie Sue! I must go to her. I
must go."

Grandmother held her back.

"No," she said. "Auntie Sue is all right, Jeanne. She only wants you to
be happy."

"Ah, but how can poor Auntie Sue sell the dresses now, when I am not
there to show them for her?" asked Jeanne.

"She will not have to sell dresses any more," said Grandmother.
"Grandmother will ask Auntie Sue to live with us always, Jeanne, if--"

"If what, Grandmother?"

"If you want her to," continued Madame Villard.

"Oh, poor dear Auntie Sue!" cried Jeanne. "She has been kind and good to
me. She could not help doing what she did. I love Auntie Sue, and I want
her to live with us always and always!"

"You are a good little girl, Jeanne. Your father would have been proud
of you," said Grandmother softly.

Then Grandmother continued, and her voice was husky, "You have been as
brave a soldier as he, Jeanne."

Grandmother arose. The two little girls followed her to the white dotted
graveyard. They knelt before one of the white slabs. Jeanne saw her own
father's name in letters before her. She tried to pray and to keep her
eyes on those words, "Paul Villard." But the letters ran together.

A little breeze seemed to be whispering over and over to her, "Jeanne
Villard, Jeanne Villard--that is your name."

Grandmother and Margot at last arose. Margot put her arm lovingly about
Jeanne's shoulder.

[Illustration: "LET US GO HOME NOW AND PLAY"]

"Come, Jeanne, little cousin," she said. "Let us go home now and play."




PRONOUNCING VOCABULARY


     Arc de Triomphe         aerk d[)e] tr[=e]'-onf'
     Argonne                 aer-g[=o]n'
     Bastille                b[.a]s-t[=e]l'
     Bois                    bwae
     Bois de Boulogne        bwae' d[~e] b[=oo]'-l[=o]n'
     Burgundy                bur'-g[)u]n-d[)i]
     Champagne               sh[)a]m-p[=a]n'
     Champs Elysees          shaen'z[=a]-l[=e]-z[=a]'
     D'Artrot                daer-tr[=o]
     Dijon                   d[=e]-zhon'
     Guignol                 g[=e]n'-y[=o]l
     Jeanne                  j[=e]n
     Louvre                  l[=oo]'-vr'
     Ma cherie               mae sh[)e]r-[=e]'
     Mademoiselle            m[.a]d-mw[.a]-z[)e]l'
     Margot                  maer'-g[=o]
     Meuse                   m[=u]z
     Mona Lisa               m[=o]'-nae l[=e]'-zae
     Moreau                  m[=o]-r[=o]'
     Pierrot                 py[)e]-r[=o]'
     Place de la Concorde    plaes d[)e] lae kon-kord'
     Place de la Revolution  plaes d[)e] lae r[)e]v-[=o]-l[=u]'-sy[=o]n'
     Pont Neuf               pon nuf
     Reims                   r[=e]mz
     Tuileries               tw[=e]l-r[=e]'
     Venus de Milo           v[=e]'-nus d[)e] m[=e]'-l[=o]
     Verdun                  v[)e]r-d[)u]n'
     Villard                 v[=e]-laer'




Transcriber's Note


Punctuation and formatting markup have been normalized.

Apparent printer's errors have been retained.

"_" surrounding text represents italics.

Some illustrations have been moved near their mention in the text.

The author makes use of many diacritical marks to aid the reader with
pronunciation. Please note that due to restrictions, some have been
marked with square brackets in the text. Therefore, if the letter "e"
has a macron over it, it will appear as [=e]. If the letter "e" has a
breve over it, it will appear as [)e]. If the letter "a" has a dot
above it, it will appear as [.a]. If the letter "e" has a tilde over it,
it will appear as [~e]. Please note that an alternative diacritic mark
was used in the word, "aer-g[=o]n'". The original diacritic mark over
the letter "o" is believed to be a short up tack.





End of Project Gutenberg's Little Jeanne of France, by Madeline Brandeis

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE JEANNE OF FRANCE ***

***** This file should be named 40806.txt or 40806.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/8/0/40806/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Veronika Redfern and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

