The Project Gutenberg EBook of Mr. Jacobs, by Arlo Bates

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Mr. Jacobs
       The Drummer the Reporter and the Prestidigitateur

Author: Arlo Bates

Release Date: October 21, 2012 [EBook #41125]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MR. JACOBS ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, sp1nd, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)








                              MR. JACOBS


                                A TALE

                                  OF

                       THE DRUMMER THE REPORTER

                       AND THE PRESTIDIGITATEUR



                           SEVENTH EDITION




                                BOSTON

                        W. B. CLARKE & CARRUTH

                                 1883

       *       *       *       *       *




MR. JACOBS.

CHAPTER I.


In spite of Jean-Jacques and his school, men are not everywhere,
especially in countries where excessive liberty or excessive tiffin
favors the growth of that class of adventurers most usually designated
as drummers, or by a still more potent servility, the ruthless
predatory instinct of certain bold and unscrupulous persons may and
almost certainly will; and in those more numerous and certainly more
happy countries where the travelling show is discouraged, the
unwearying flatterer, patient under abstemious high-feeding, will
assuredly become a roving sleight-of-hand man.

Without doubt the Eastern portion of the world, when an hereditary,
or, at least, a traditional, if not customary, or, perhaps,
conservative, not to say legendary, or, more correctly speaking,
historic, despotism has never ceased to ingrain the blood of Russia,
Chinese, Ottoman, Persia, India, British, or Nantasket, in a perfect
instance of a ruthless military tiffin, where neither blood nor
stratagem have been spared.[1]

[Footnote 1: The editor was here obliged to omit a score of pages, in
which the only thing worth preserving was a carcanet of sulphur
springs.]

       *       *       *       *       *

I was at tiffin. A man sat opposite whose servant brought him water
in a large goblet cut from a single emerald. I observed him closely. A
water-drinker is always a phenomenon to me; but a water-drinker who
did the thing so artistically, and could swallow the fluid without
wincing, was such a manifestation as I had never seen.

I contrasted him with our neighbors at the lunch-counter, who seemed
to be vying, like the captives of Circe, to ascertain by trial who
could swallow the most free lunch, and pay for the fewest
"pegs,"--those vile concoctions of spirits, ice, and soda-water, which
have destroyed so many splendid resolutions on the part of the
Temperance Alliance,--and an impression came over me that he must be
the most innocent man on the road.

Before I go farther let me try and describe him. His peculiarity was
that, instead of eyes, he had jewels composed of six precious stones.
There was a depth of life and vital light in them that told of the
pent-up force of a hundred, or, at least, of ninety-nine generations
of Persian magi. They blazed with the splendor of a god-like nature,
needing neither tiffin nor brandy and soda to feed their power.

My mind was made up. I addressed him in Gaelic. To my surprise, and
somewhat to my confusion, he answered in two words of modern Hebrew.
We fell into a polyglot but refined conversation.

"Come and smoke," he said, at length.

Slipping into the office of the hotel, and ascertaining that there was
no danger, I followed to his room.

"I am known as Mr. Jacobs," he said. "My lawful name is Abdallah
Hafiz-ben-butler-Jacobi."

The apartment, I soon saw, was small,--for India at least,--and every
available space, nook, and cranny, were filled with innumerable
show-cases of Attleboro' jewelry.

"Pretty showy?" he remarked familiarly. "I am a drummer."

"My name is Peter Briggs," I replied. "I am a correspondent of the
_Calcutta Jackal_."

"My star!" he said. "That is the dog-star. A sudden thought strikes
me," he added. "Let us swear an eternal friendship."

He thereupon told me his entire history, from childhood up. It was
interesting to the last degree, as I had thought often before, when I
read it in various dime novels.

He ceased speaking, and the waning moon rose pathetically, with a
curiously doleful look, expressive of quiet, but deep contempt.




CHAPTER II.


The next morning I had tiffin.

I speculated in regard to Mr. Jacobs. A long and eventful experience
with three-card monte men had made me extremely shy of persons who
begin an acquaintance by making confidences; and I wondered why he had
taken the trouble to make up the story of his life, to relate to an
entire stranger. Still, there was something about the man that seemed
to promise an item for the _Calcutta Jackal_, and therefore, when
Jacobs appeared, looking like the sunflower, for all his wild dress
and his knee-breeches, I felt the "little thrill of pleasure," so
aptly compared by Swinburne to the clutch of a hand in the hair.

"Are you married?" queried Mr. Jacobs.

"Thank heavens, no!" I replied, convulsively. "Are you?"

"Some," returned he, gloomily. "I have three. They do not agree. Do
you think a fourth wife would calm them?"

"A man," I observed, sententiously, "is better off with no wife at all
than with three."

His subtle mind caught the flaw instantly.

"Negative happiness," he murmured; "very negative. Oh, I would I could
marry all the sweet creatures!"

Having our tiffins saddled, we rode off at a breakneck pace, and
cleverly managed to ride down the uncle of the heroine.

"Dear uncle," casually remarked that young lady, riding up, "I hope
you are not hurt."

"What an original remark!" exclaimed Jacobs, with rapture. "Miss
Eastinhoe is beautiful and sensible. I like her. What do you suppose
she is worth?"




CHAPTER III.


Having tiffined, we reclined upon a divan.

"My father," said Mr. Jacobs, "had but one wife; I have already raised
him two, as I told you, and mean to go him one better."

I smoked in silence.

"A hint for the _Calcutta Jackal_," I thought, with satisfaction.
"Bigamy raised to the third power."

"You are right," he said, slowly, his half-closed eyes fixed on his
feet; "yes, you are right. But why not?"

I shook myself, drank some sherbert, and kicked off one shoe
impatiently. This reading of a gentleman's private thoughts seemed to
me an unwarrantable impertinence; but a sudden light flashed over my
obscured intellect, and, observing that he was in a trance, I felt it
would be indelicate to argue the matter. I fired my shoe at him, to
assure myself of his condition, and then held a free pass towards him.
He instantly recovered, and stretched out his hand to take it.

"I must have been dreaming," he said, a look of annoyance shading his
features as I drew the pass away. "But I am in love."

It was near midnight, and the ever-decreasing moon was dragging
herself up, as if ashamed of her waning beauty and tearful look.




CHAPTER VI.


We called upon Miss Eastinhoe the following day. She was playing with
a half-tamed young tiffin, a charming little beast, with long gray fur
and bright twinkling eye, mischievous and merry as a gnome's. He was a
gift of Mr. Jacobs to the lady. He cost nothing.

"Are you spoken for?" Miss Eastinhoe asked, her eyes opening a moment
and meeting his, but falling again instantly with a change of
color.[2]

[Footnote 2: The editor had his doubts about this; but as it so stands
in the original MS. (p. 69), concludes that in low latitudes, eyes do
change color on slight provocation.]

"Miss Eastinhoe," he said, quietly, "you know I am a man of muscle,
and that I have three wives."

"Oh, I had forgotten!" she said; "I forgot about your wives."

"Among primitive people, and persons in pinafores," I interposed,
"marriage is a social law."

"You surprise me, Mr. Briggs," she said, with an air of childlike
simplicity.

I felt that I had put a plug into my end of the conversation.

"We will play polo next week," said Mr. Jacobs. "Meanwhile, let us
visit a Certain Mighty Personage."




CHAPTER V.


"We will go at four," said Jacobs, coming into my room after tiffin.
"I said three this morning, but it is not a bad plan to keep natives
waiting."

"Why do we go?" I inquired, languidly.

"The Certain Mighty Personage has a prisoner whom I wish to purchase."

"Who is it?"

Leaning over until his mouth almost touched my ear, he whispered
quietly:

"Number One."

"The devil, you say!" I ejaculated, surprised out of grammar and
decorum by the startling news.

"Are you thinking of marrying Miss Eastinhoe?" I demanded, after a
pause of some tiffins.

"Yes," he answered, "if her settlements are satisfactory."

Arrived at the residence of the Certain Mighty Personage, we were
received in a jemadar where a sahib charpoyed the sowans and tiffined
the maharajah.

"I'll have you exposed in the newspapers," said Jacobs, sternly, to
the Certain Mighty Personage, "if you do not deliver into my hands,
before the dark half of the next moon, the man Number One."

The Uncertain Mighty Personage signed a contract to that effect, with
extreme reluctance, and with many forcible remarks disrespectful to
both the ancestors and posterity of Jacobs.

"What do you want of Number One?" I inquired, as we rode away.

"He is the only man alive that can keep a plated watch from turning
black in this accursed climate."

"But why did you bring me along, when you didn't need me?"

"To frighten him with the threat of the _Calcutta Jackal_. Besides,
how else could you tell the story?"




CHAPTER VI.


We rode our tiffins back and met Miss Eastinhoe with her friends.

"Let us go on a tiger-hunt," we all remarked, casually.

As we drove home a voice suddenly broke on the darkness.[3]

[Footnote 3: Another curious Oriental phenomenon, not sufficiently
explained by the author.]

"Peace, Abdallah Hafiz," it said.

"By the holy poker, the Jibena-inosay!" answered Jacobs, who had
recognized the broken voice.

"I have business with thee," continued the voice; "I will be with
thee, anon."

"It is Lamb Ral," my companion explained, as the voice faded away.
"Facetious as ever; now you have him, and then again you don't have
him. We call him the Little Joker, for short."

"Isn't he difficult to explain?" I ventured.

"Very," he said. "But who has ever explained how a man could keep his
family up for years with no visible means of support; or how a person
can promenade on his ear; or crawl into a hole and pull the hole in
after him. And yet you have seen those things, I have seen them,
everybody has seen them, and most of us have done them ourselves."

Later in the evening we were visited by Lamb Ral.

"Do not go tiger-hunting," he said. "It will take you out of the lines
of the jewellery trade."

"Still I shall go," persisted Jacobs.

"What a singular piece of workmanship is that ytaghan!" observed Lamb
Ral, waving one delicate hand towards the wall behind us.

When we turned back from seeing that there was no ytaghan there, the
magician had disappeared, leaving a strong smell of lucifer matches
behind him, but taking a number of triple-plated watches.

"Singular man," said Jacobs, musingly. "I wish I knew how he does it.
It must be profitable."




CHAPTER VII.


We had tiffin with Miss Eastinhoe. Mr. Jacobs, in evening dress,
looked surpassingly lovely.




CHAPTER VIII.


In the third game of polo a clumsy player struck Mr. Jacobs on the
back of his head, laying open his skull. The wounded man fell from his
saddle, but his foot caught in the stirrup, and he was dragged several
miles by the infuriated Arab pony.

"Don't give him brandy," remarked Miss Eastinhoe, calmly. "Water will
do quite as well. It is cheaper, and, as he is insensible, he will not
know the difference."

"Thank you," replied Jacobs, gracefully tying his head together with
a white woollen shawl. "We will start on the tiger hunt to-morrow."

He carefully lighted a cigarette and rode home.

"Briggs," Jacobs said, producing a mysterious trick bottle, "do as I
tell you or you are a dead man. Stuff this wax into your nose, and
bathe the back of my neck with this powerful remedy unknown to your
Western medicine. I shall then fall asleep. If I do not wake before
midnight, I shall sleep until breakfast time. You can easily arouse me
by pressing the little silver knob behind my left ear. If you cannot
remember, write it down."

Being a newspaper man, I naturally took out an old letter upon which
to jot down his instructions. I faithfully carried out all his
directions, and it is to be remarked in passing that on removing the
wax from my nostrils, I was conscious of a strong odor of Scotch
whiskey.




CHAPTER IX.


We started on our tiger-hunt. Miss Eastinhoe rode on an elephant,
about which Jacobs, who loved the saddle, circled gayly, keeping up a
fire of little compliments and pretty speeches of which he had
thoughtfully brought a tiffinful with him, but to which the lady very
fortunately soon became inured. He had also taken the precaution to
have relay's of runners bring fresh roses half-way across India every
morning for Miss Eastinhoe, whom he amused meantime by playing
beautifully on the tiffin and warbling Persian love-songs.




CHAPTER X.


Guided only by a native tiffin, upon whom he showered an astonishing
profusion of opprobrious epithets, Mr. Jacobs went forth in the dark
and stilly night, and slaughtered a huge man-eating tiger, for whose
ears Miss Eastinhoe had expressed a singular, but well-defined
longing. The beast measured twenty-four feet, and, by stretching the
story a little, I was able to say twenty-seven.

"My dear fellow," I said, "I am sincerely glad to see you back alive."

"Thank you, old man," he said, falling easily into English slang. "Do
you know I have a superstition that I must fulfil every wish of hers.
Besides, the skin will fetch a capital price."

"I adore you," murmured Miss Eastinhoe. "I shall have the ears
pickled."




CHAPTER XI.


An old yogi stood near an older well. He put a stone in the bucket,
and the slave could not draw it up. Suddenly the bottom came out, and
the stout water-carrier fell headlong backwards on the grass.

"Did you ever see anything of that kind before, Miss Eastinhoe?" I
inquired.

"No, indeed," she replied. "I always before supposed that to fall
headlong a man must go forwards."

"I am off to see a Certain Mighty Personage," Mr. Jacobs remarked,
stooping casually from his saddle to kiss Miss Eastinhoe on her white
gold hair, which shone so that it made the moon look, on the whole,
rather sickly, as an electric light pales the gas-jet. "If I want you,
I'll send for you. Lamb Ral has a Star Route contract and will bring
you word."

He rode away, and I pensively smoked my tiffin.




CHAPTER XII.


The afternoon mail brought me a postal-card:

"I shall want you after all. Please ride night and day for a week. It
is a matter of life and death."

Changing horses every five or six miles, I rode over the greater part
of Asia, subsisting on a light but elegant diet of chocolate caramels.
Then I stopped to take tiffin with a striking-looking fellow in a
dirty brown cloth _caftan_ Jacobs' face changed when I gave him a
silver box Miss Eastinhoe sent him.

"I gave her this myself;" he said; "it is only plated."

"Mr. Briggs," interposed Lamb Ral, with decision, "we are about to go
down into the valley. If you see any man attacking Mr. Jacobs, knock
him down. If you cannot do that, shoot him under the arm. At any rate
dispose of him. I am not Wiggins, but I predict a storm."




CHAPTER XIII.


After tiffin we went down into the valley to meet the emissary of a
Certain Mighty Person and Number One. The emissary advanced with a
scroll so illegible that Jacobs bent over it in despair. Taking
advantage of his absorption, the villain put his hand upon my friend's
shoulder. I sprang upon him like a bull-dog.

Meanwhile Lamb Ral created a pleasant diversion by drawing down from
the sky a blood-curdling fog, heavier than the after-dinner speech of
an alderman, more dense than the public taste, more paralyzing than
the philosophy of the last popular novel. Dread and cottony, like a
curtain, descended the awful cloud into the uplifted arms of the
sleight-of-hand man, until I could not see an inch before my nose.
Nevertheless I was able to observe that he had stretched himself,
probably by an arrangement of crossed levers, to an incalculable
height, and I distinctly observed him wink with one eye as I kneaded
my adversary.

As I had just snapped the arm of the emissary like a pipe-stem and the
rest had each killed somebody, the mist was opportune and our party
skulked back to camp, where we all drank a good deal of tiffin. The
result of our imbibing was that Jacobs clapped Number One on the
shoulder.

"You're a bully good fellow," he observed, thickly. "Git!"

Lamb Ral and Number One disappeared in a red light, with plaintive
music from the orchestra.




CHAPTER XIV.


We returned home.

"Miss Eastinhoe is dead!" I said to Mr. Jacobs.

"It is really better," remarked Lamb Ral, who chanced to be astrally
present, being also in Ireland with Number One at the same moment.
"There was absolutely no other way of concluding the story. She
wouldn't be a fourth wife; besides, she was so shadowy a personage
that nobody cared anything about her."

"No," said Mr. Jacobs. "I had wholly forgotten that."

"You had better go and be a nun," Lamb Ral continued, reclining upon
a tiffin. "Trade is dull, and your last trick in glass emeralds has
been discovered."

"On the whole I think I will," replied Jacobs. "Briggs, I have given
my fortune to Miss Eastinhoe's brother, who rescued me from the
gutter. To you I give this diamond. I know you too well to trust you
with anything else. Nay," he added, seeing my inquiring look, "do not
ask its price or try it with a file until I am gone."

"You won't come and be a nun yourself, Mr. Briggs?" Lamb Ral inquired,
with some apprehension.

"Thanks, no," I answered, drawing my tiffin over my shoulders, "I'll
write the thing up."

"Thank you, noble friend," Jacobs said, grasping my hand with emotion.
"You have been the instructor and the genius of my love. I go to be a
nun. Be yourself what you have made me."

One last, loving look,--one more pressure of the reluctant fingers,
and those two went out, hand in hand, under the clear stars, and I saw
them no more.




POSTSCRIPT.


I afterwards ascertained that the fortune left to Mr. Eastinhoe
consisted chiefly of the three discarded wives of Mr. Jacobs.

"I had no means of supporting them," Mr. Eastinhoe remarked,
gravely,--he was from Bombay, and Bombay men never smile,--"so I was
forced to have them served for tiffin. What will you take?"

"A peg of tiffin," I replied, with a pensive sigh.


FINIS.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Mr. Jacobs, by Arlo Bates

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MR. JACOBS ***

***** This file should be named 41125.txt or 41125.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/1/2/41125/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, sp1nd, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
