The Project Gutenberg EBook of Willis's Current Notes, by George Willis

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Willis's Current Notes
       Volume 2 February Issue

Editor: George Willis

Release Date: November 16, 2012 [EBook #41372]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILLIS'S CURRENT NOTES ***




Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Ernest Schaal,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net







                         WILLIS'S CURRENT NOTES
                             FOR THE MONTH.

No. XIV.] "I will make a prief of it in my Note-Book."--SHAKSPERE.
[FEBRUARY, 1852.




                         NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS

                 TO THE "PRICE CURRENT OF LITERATURE."


G. WILLIS gratefully acknowledges the various interesting documents and
letters he has received. He is anxious that it should be perfectly
understood that he is not the author of any statement, representation,
or opinion, that may appear in his "Current Notes," which are merely
selections from communications made to him in the course of his
business, and which appear to him to merit attention. Every statement
therefore is open to correction or discussion, and the writers of the
several paragraphs should be considered as alone responsible for their
assertions. Although many notes have hitherto appeared anonymously, or
with initial letters, yet wherever a serious contradiction is involved,
G. Willis trusts that his Correspondents will feel the necessity of
allowing him to make use of their names when properly required.




ETHNOLOGY.--The marvellous pamphlet published in New York, with
reference to the Aztec Children exhibiting there, has reached G. W.,
with the copy to be presented to a distinguished traveller, which has
been delivered to him; and he seems not inclined to disbelieve in the
accuracy of any of its statements, whatever may be the opinion of G.
W.'s New York Special Reporter. (See "Current Notes" for January, p. 4.)

The pamphlet purposes to give an account of the discovery of an
idolatrous city called _Iximaya_, in Central America, with 85,000
inhabitants, situate somewhere about 16 deg. 42' N. and 91 deg. 35' W., whose
priests seem to consider the flesh of Scotchmen to be a peculiar
culinary luxury--when they can catch them. The information given to the
discoverers of the ideal or real city of _Iximaya_, was "that a man of
the same race as Senor Hammond, who was of a bright-florid complexion,
with light hair and red whiskers, had been sacrificed and eaten by the
Macbenachs or priests of Iximaya, the great city among the hills, about
thirty moons ago, (previous to May, 1849)."

It has been asserted that Mr. Wheelwright, an American gentleman of the
highest respectability, well known and much respected both in London and
Liverpool as the originator of the Pacific Steam Navigation Company, is
(or was) well acquainted with the author of this very extraordinary
pamphlet. And although it must be confessed, that if considered as a
piece of mere invention, for in marvellous incident it is a formidable
rival to the voyage and travels of one Lemuel Gulliver, or the life and
adventures of the well known Mr. Robinson Crusoe,--yet the fact should
not be forgotten, that "Truth is sometimes stranger than fiction."

G. W. anxiously looks for the opinions of the well-informed press upon
this matter, which, with the exception of the _Sunday Times_ of the 15th
of February, have been silent about the "Pigmies" exhibiting in New
York;--and about which, as G. W.'s "Special" observed last month--"there
is NO MISTAKE."




THE BAWDRICK OR BALDROCK, (_Illustrated Correction_.)--Few people
feel inclined to acknowledge an error, or to make a correction. See
Willis's "Current Notes" for February last (p. 16), where Sir Walter
Scott's remark is quoted, that "it is ill making holes in one's own
stockings for the purpose of darning them again, darn we never so
neatly." However, G. W. is always happy--not to feel himself in the
wrong--but to correct any mistake which inadvertently he or his
agents may have made. He has therefore no hesitation about printing
the following communication.

"H. T. E. informs G. W. that the engraver of the sketch of the Bawdrick,
which appeared in the last number of the "Current Notes" (p. 5),"
has omitted one important reference, and a letter of reference, (which
H. T. E. believes he sent).

"In fig. 2, letter B, all is right.

"But in fig. 1, letter B is wrong; it should have been by the side, and
where that B is should have been an E, which was thus described:

"E. A piece of hard wood, placed between the staple and the end of the
clapper, which is made steady to the clapper by D, the busk board, &c.

"As engraved, H. T. E. fears it will be a terrible puzzler to the
uninitiated in Campanology, and even Campanologists will wonder at the
confusion. The upper joint should have been _thus_, and the lower joint
square (but G. W.'s artist has reversed the thing), for it is at B that
the clapper swings.

[Illustration]

"Still it is well to have got the thing shewn to the public, and H. T.
E. thanks G. W., and supposes all blunders must be set down to his
correspondent's fault of indistinct writing."




                                      Strood, Rochester, 13th Feb. 1852.

SIR,--In reference to the letter of H. T. E. page 5 of your work, I beg
to send you the following extracts from the Account Book of the
Churchwardens of this Parish, now in my possession:--

                                                          H. WICKHAM.
    "Ao. 1555.
    It^m. payd For a horse hyde xx^d.
    For maykyng of y^e bawdreck ij^d."
    "1556.
    For whytt lether for y^e bawdreck xij^d.
    For maykyng of iiij bawdrecks . viij^d."




                 THE HISTORIC SOCIETY OF LANCASHIRE AND
                               CHESHIRE.


                                          Liverpool, 30th Jan. 1852.

SIR,--I have to complain that your Correspondent T. M. rushes into print
so incautiously on the subject of his tobacco-pipe. From the accuracy of
his quotation, he appears to have had the Society's volume before him,
yet he has taken no trouble to arrive at the truth. Mr. Lamb's paper was
read three months before the woodcut of the pipe in question appeared;
but as the latter was of peculiar form, it was engraved, as well as one
or two others that had not been exhibited. All of these were minutely
referred to. Thus, in the NOTE RESPECTING THE PLATES, p. iii. there is
the following:--"No. 14 [on Plate IV.] is from 'Willis's Current Notes,'
for April, 1851; the stem is of bamboo, and the top of the bowl of
brass. It was found in taking down an old inn at Fulham in 1836." From a
mutilated copy I send you the actual leaf for the use of T. M.;[1] and
have to express my sorrow that he does not possess either more patience
or more civility,

                                                 A. HUME, D.C.L.
                                            Corresponding Secretary.

    [1] G. W. _has forwarded it to his Correspondent, and begs to
        thank the Rev. Dr. Hume for this correction of T. M.'s
        oversight, and the manner in which an acknowledgment has
        been made to "Willis's Current Notes," which it gratifies
        him to find considered worthy of the attention of_ THE
        HISTORIC SOCIETY OF LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE.




                     THE LATE J. M. W. TURNER, R.A.


_G. W. has the honour to acknowledge the receipt of five communications
respecting the Sketch of the late Mr. Turner, which appeared with_ J. T.
A.'s _letter in the January number of_ "Current Notes," (p. 1.) _Four of
his correspondents are pleased with the Sketch, and one who signs
himself_, D. R. _states that he knew Mr. Turner well, and considers it
to be, "no caricature, but on the contrary, an excellent likeness_."

_However, the following epistle, expresses a different opinion._


                                                   Yarm^o. Feb, 2, 1852.

SIR,--How very vexing it is that the "rude sketch" favoured by your
obliging correspondent, (J. T. A.) was not placed in the hands of
some R. A. (before engraved), who was acquainted and well knew that
celebrated painter, and from that ("rude sketch") and the knowledge he
(R. A.) had of the late Turner, would have favoured us with a more
characteristic portrait. Was he not more than four feet in stature? This
represented ("Current Notes," January, 1852, p. 1), reminds us of a
wooden punchinello more than any thing that ever breathed, and not at
all _credible_ to the "Current Notes." All such Notes are highly
interesting if properly done.

    In haste.                                      Yours faithfully,
                                                                  W.




THE MARQUIS OF WORCESTER, (_Author of the "Century of Inventions"_).--R.
C. particularly thanked for his communication.




                       ANCIENT SIGNET EXPLAINED.


                                                Southwick, near Oundle,
                                                    Jan. 30th, 1852.

SIR,--Your excellent little work, "Current Notes," is worthy of all
praise and support; as affording to the Numismatist, the Paleologist,
and the Archeologist, &c. the means not only of giving a written account
of their various studies, but also of exhibiting facsimiles of the
objects of their research. At the same time that I thank you for the
insertion of my last (p. 3, Jan. 1852), allow me to present you with one
of, I think, much greater interest to the Chronologist and Historian,
taken from "Gesenii Monumenta Phoenicia, Pars 3, Tab. 11, fig. XL. bis,"

[Illustration]

The letters at the top of the signet are _Ch sr b l_; and the reading
is, "_The great king_." At the bottom of the signet they are,
_A ch m n_; and the reading is, "_Achemen_," and with the Greek
termination _Achaemenes_. On the right side they are _a n b_, Hebrew
[Hebrew letters: Aleph, nun, and Bet], taken as numerical characters,
_i.e._ 1000, 700, 2; making the date 1702. On the left, the figure like
the Greek [Greek: ou], is the sign of Taurus, to denote the month when
the sun entered into Taurus. The _dove and leaf_ seem to refer to "_the
dove and olive leaf_," Gen. viii. 11.

Let me now refer your readers to Drummond's Origines, v. 1, p. 310:

"The Greeks fancied Achaemenes to have been the name of the progenitor of
Cyrus; but _Achaemenes_ is nothing else than a corruption of one of those
pompous and impious titles, which were assumed by the kings of Iran, and
of which the inscriptions explained by M. de Sacy afford many examples.
_Achaemenes_, as I have shown elsewhere, signifies _Rex coeli_ in ancient
Persian."

So much for _guess-work_, which cannot be too much reprobated. I do not
pretend to any skill in chronology, but the calculation appears to be so
simple, that I will attempt it, taking the dates of our authorized
version of the Bible.

    Deluge                          2349 A.C.
    Signet engraved                 1702 _from_ the Deluge
    Or                               647 A.C.
    Cyrus begins to reign            537 A.C.

Therefore, from the beginning of the reign of Achaemenes to the same of
Cyrus is 110 years.

From this remarkable signet we obtain the historical truth, that
Achaemenes began his reign in the month Taurus, 1702, after THE _Deluge_.
I have found the Deluge taken as an epoch in various Cuneiform and
Egyptian, &c. documents, that have not been explained to the public.

                              Yours truly,
                                                        T. R. BROWN.

_T. R. B.'s translation received, but must stand over for the present._




                    ROBERT HOBLYN, _quere_ RICHARD?
                               No. 59, Grey Street, Newcastle, Tyne,
                                        January 28th, 1852.

SIR,--In your "Current Notes" for this month (p. 7), a correspondent, A.
K., enquires about "Robert Hoblyn" and his Works. Presuming he has made
a mistake in the name, and that he means "Richard" instead of "Robert,"
I send herewith a list of some of "Richard's" Works,

                                    I remain, yours,
    Mr. Willis.                                         THOMAS GRAY.

Richard D. Hoblyn, A.M., Oxon, author of "Medical Terms," "Scientific
Terms," "Manuals of Natural Philosophy of Chemistry, and of the Steam
Engine," "First Books in Science," &c. &c.




                             ROBERT HOBLYN.

                                                  4, Birchin Lane,
                                                February 7th, 1852.

SIR,--In answer to a letter in your "Price Current" for January 25th,
(p. 7), addressed to you, and signed "A. K." I beg to inform your
correspondent that "Robert Hoblyn," published the following works:--

    "Bibliotheca Hoblyniana," 8vo. London, 1767.

    "The First Book of the Georgics of Virgil, Lat. and Eng. with
    Translation in blank verse, and notes, 8vo. London, 1825."

It is worthy to notice that "M. A." is affixed to his name in the last
named work.

I am not aware that he published any other works; but a perusal of the
Catalogue of Printed Books in the British Museum would satisfactorily
decide this point.

Perhaps your correspondent means "Richard Hoblyn," whose publications
are very numerous.

                                            Your obedient servant,
                                                       S. I. TUCKER.




                         LAVERS, _the Bookseller_.

                                        Overseal, Ashby de la Zouch.

SIR,--I should be very much obliged to any of your correspondents who
will give me information respecting Mr. Lavers, a bookseller in London,
who flourished about the third quarter of the last century; especially
any thing relating to his wife and descendants.

                                        Very faithfully yours,
                                                      J. M. GRESLEY.
13th Feb. a.d. 1852.




TRADESMEN'S TOKENS.--Can any of your readers inform me if there are any
Tradesmen's Tokens of Scotland, issued during the 17th century; and if
not, can any cause be assigned for it. I have a very large collection of
tokens of the 17th century, of England, Wales, and Ireland, but not one
of Scotland, which is very singular, as the towns of Edinburgh, Glasgow,
Aberdeen, Sterling, Perth, &c. must have had as great need of a small
currency, as many small villages in England, of which there are many
specimens.

By far the most numerous of the English tokens belong to the Southern
and Midland districts: of the city of Oxford alone I have 62 varieties.
The Northern Counties are much fewer in number: of Cumberland I have
only tokens of two towns, Carlisle and Cockermouth; of Northumberland,
the town of Newcastle only; of Westmoreland, Appleby, Kendal, and Kirby
Steven.

The ordinary value is the halfpenny for the Southern Counties, having
usually the Arms of some Company of the City of London, and the initials
of the issuer, his wife and family name, with the name, trade and
business at full length. The great bulk of these tokens are of a
monotonous character, with a few curious exceptions.

One of square shape, issued by Thomas Dedicot, in Bewdley, has the
legend, "SQUARE DEALING." A copper token of Worcester, has a brass
plug in the centre. A facetious Boniface of Leeds gives us the
double-entendre, "BEWARE THE BEARE," with his sign of the Bear. To make
the catch better, it should be known that in Yorkshire, BEER and BEAR,
are pronounced alike. The device and motto of the Baron Bradwardine is
consequently older than the time of the author of Waverley. Roger
Dickinson, of Robin Hood's Bay, affects a heart-shaped token, on which
are represented the popular heroes, Robin Hood and Little John: Little
John is represented half the size of Robin Hood, instead of being
considerably taller, not knowing he was so nick-named from his gigantic
stature. There are other tokens of octagon and diamond shape.

The Welsh tokens are generally of very good execution: the halfpenny of
Edward Lloyd, of Kidwelly, is very neat; a few of Carnarvon are small,
and issued at one penny, of a similar character to those of Ireland,
which I have next to mention.

The Irish tokens are of a different character to those of England and
Wales, being generally small, issued at one penny, and the issuer
styling himself Marchant. The penny token of John Whittle, of Kilkenny,
1656, has the Arms of the Commonwealth on it; the only instance that I
know of: the King's Arms are plentiful enough.

[Illustration]

Besides the list of towns given by Lindsay in his "View of the Coinage
of Ireland, 1839," I can add from my collection, Ballinasloe,
Downpatrick, Loughrea, Mount-Mellick, Navan and Roscommon, besides many
varieties of the towns Mr. Lindsay has published.

The circulation of these tokens was forbidden under severe penalties in
1673, but in Ireland they were continued partially to near the close of
the 18th century, when another general issue of tokens throughout Great
Britain was allowed by Government, owing to the great scarcity of small
money. The tokens of this period are of an entirely different size and
character to those of the preceding century.

                                                          WM. BOYNE.
    Leeds, Feb. 1852.




LITHOGRAPHY.--Some years ago, letters and papers of William Combe, the
well known author of "Dr. Syntax," came into my possession, and with
them a paper, of which the following is a copy:--

    "_I have been told of one
    Who being ask'd for bread,
        In its stead
    Returned a stone._

    _But here we manage better.
        The Stone we ask
        To do its task,
    And it returns us every letter._

            _Wm. Combe, January 23, 1817._"

    "_This is the first impression of Ackermann's Lithographic
    press._"

Combe was so intimately connected with Ackermann's establishment, that
there can be no doubt of the fact that the paper I have, was truly the
very _first_ impression in Lithography in England. The poetic scrap was
no doubt Combe's own, and the facsimile shews that it was in Combe's
writing.

                                                         ROBT. COLE.
    52, Upper Norton Street.




STERNE'S AUTOGRAPH.--As mentioned by A. C. K. in "Current Notes" for
January, p. 2, as _occurring on the title page_[2] of his "Tristram
Shandy," is not I believe often met with, but I doubt much its having
been written for the gratification of particular friends, to whom copies
of the work were presented.

I have two (the title pages only) in my possession.

                                                        ROBERT COLE.
    52, Upper Norton Street.

    [2] G. W.'s respected Correspondent A. C. K. said "_at the head
        of the first chapter in some or one of the volumes_" of a
        few of the first editions.




                        MIDDLE AGES.--MEDIAEVAL.


These terms are now so frequently used in reference to periods and
works of art, that it would be useful to your readers if some competent
person would define precisely what period is comprehended in the term
_mediaeval_. In a recent Exhibition many works of a comparatively late
date were classed as mediaeval. Mr. James, speaking of _Charlemagne_,
says--"the precise birth-place of the greatest man of the middle ages is
unknown." Here he refers to the year 742. Some of the correspondents
will, perhaps, through your "Notes Current," define the limits of this
term.

                                                               S. E.




                      ARCHAEOLOGICAL PUBLICATIONS.


SIR,--With regard to the inquiry made in your "Current Notes" for
December, p. 93, with respect to Archaeological publications, I wish to
direct your Correspondent to a publication issued by the Architectural
Societies for Northampton, Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, and Bedfordshire,
consisting of the Reports and Papers read before those Societies in the
year 1850. The second part, comprising the Transactions for the Year
1851, is now in the press, and will shortly be published. These two
parts will form one handsome octavo volume, printed more especially for
the use of the Members of the above Societies, but a few copies are
reserved for general sale, for which Mr. Masters is the agent; Thinking
that your Correspondent might be glad to hear of the existence of this
volume, I thought it as well to trouble you with this note.

                      I remain, yours faithfully,
                                                     T. PYNDAR LOWE.

Saltfletby, Louth, Jan. 29.




BLACKWOOD'S MAGAZINE.--With reference to the January Number of "Current
Notes," p. 2, and the reply to an inquiry (from J. P., Philadelphia,
18th November) respecting the Author of "Father Tom and the Pope, or a
Night at the Vatican,"--a paper which appeared in Blackwood some years
ago, W. C. J. A. has had the goodness to inform G. W. that the reply
given by F. M. is not quite correct.

"The writer of that paper was Mr. Samuel Ferguson, then and still a
Member of the Irish Bar, going the North-East Circuit, and a native of
Belfast. Mr. Ferguson is also the author of some spirited stanzas,
published in the same Magazine, entitled, 'The Forging of the Anchor,'
and is very favourably known as the author of some interesting papers in
'Blackwood,' and in the Antiquarian department of the 'Transactions of
the Royal Irish Academy,' of which learned body he has been for several
years a member."

"Mr. F." adds W. C. J. A. "has, _I believe_, but I am not quite sure,
written in the 'Dublin University Magazine.'"




THE SHADOOF.--I beg to inform W. G. with reference to his observations
in your "Current Notes" for December last, that the Shadoof as engraved
by you at p. 96 is in common use all over the State of New York in
places where wells are obliged to be sunk, the machine being far less
costly than a pump, and such as anybody can construct.

We have abundance of rivers and streams, so many indeed, that I have
never seen a windmill in America.

                                      YOUR N. Y. ES-PECIAL REPORTER.




THOMAS HOOD.--How lamentable is it to observe, from the research of
A. K. in Willis's "Current Notes" for December (p. 90), and for which I
sincerely thank his Correspondent, that so eminent a man as Thomas Hood
should so recently have departed from among us without record of his
death.

His Song of the Shirt alone, written with so humane a purpose, surely
demanded some notice. Are you aware that the Song of the Shirt suggested
the American Sewing Machine, exhibited in the World's Fair, for the
purpose of relieving poor females from the nightly drudgery of
"stitch--stitch--stitch?"                                      W. S.




              AMERICAN TESTIMONIAL TO MRS. COWDEN CLARKE.


MR. WILLIS,--Some of your correspondents appear mighty fond of Old Oaken
Chairs, and I rather think if they were to visit the good old City of
Aberdeen, and go into the "Auld Kirk," they will see an Oak Chair
somewhat older than the engraved specimens in your "Current Notes," and
on a scroll over it, they will see written

                       "=The Chaire of Veritie.="

But what do you say to the New Rosewood Shaksperian Chair, sent from New
York as a complimentary testimonial to an amiable lady living at
Bayswater, the inscription on which exquisite piece of work is as
follows:

                                   TO
                        MRS. MARY COWDEN CLARKE
                        THIS CHAIR IS PRESENTED
                BY A FEW LADIES AND GENTLEMEN OF AMERICA
             AS A TRIBUTE OF GRATITUDE, FOR THE UNEQUALLED
                                INDUSTRY
                     WHICH GAVE THE READERS OF ENGLISH
                          THROUGHOUT THE WORLD
                     HER CONCORDANCE TO SHAKSPERE.


_G. W. begs to add, that it is unnecessary for him to engrave the
beautiful drawing forwarded to him of this Chair, as he perceives an
engraving has already appeared in the Lady's Newspaper for the 24th
January, and he has returned the drawing as requested._




KATY-DID.--G. W.'s _New York Special Reporter writes him as follows, in
reference to the paragraph, p. 90 of "Current Notes" for December last._

SIR,--Please inform "_An Entomologist_" that it will afford your Special
Reporter much pleasure to send him a live specimen of the KATY-DID next
_fall_. We have no _Autumn_ in America! It is then they begin to sing,
or rather to say: at present they are, to use the words of Davie
Gellatley, "A' dead an' gane--a' dead an' gane." I first heard them one
evening in August among the elms on the battery, and so loud was the
noise, I fancied it was made by porters landing bars of iron on the
adjoining quays.

The jingle of the song your Entomological correspondent enquires after
was something like this; but I will send him a copy when I can procure
one.

     "The dear little Katy-did sat on a tree,
      And surly and sulky and savage was he,
      His supper was stolen away by a bee,
    But he thought his own deary had hidd'n it,
      And while he kept calling 'twas you, Katy-did,
    She merrily cried--'Katy-did-n't,'

                                       [_Chorus of Boys and Girls._]

    Katy-did--Katy-didn't--Katy-did--Katy-didn't."

The moral of the song is, that a lady will always have the last word, be
she insect or woman.

Mr. Willis.




                     SCRAPS FROM THE UNITED STATES


The space at G. W.'s command will only permit him to notice generally,
and most gratefully to acknowledge, the number, variety, and interest of
C. F. D.'s communications, and sincerely to thank him for the kind
manner in which they have been forwarded.

                               * * * * *

1. The existence of Hebrew relics among the Pottawatomie Indians
is extremely curious. That procured by Dr. Lykins is described as
consisting of

    "Four small rolls or strips of parchment, closely packed in the
    small compartments of a little box or locket, of about an inch
    cubical content. On these parchments are written, in a style of
    unsurpassed excellence, and far more beautiful than print,
    portions of the Pentateuch, to be worn as frontlets, and
    intended as stimulants to the memory and moral sense."

2. A notice of Professor Stuart's death has been recorded in G. W.'s
Literary and Scientific Obituary.

    "He published at least twenty-four volumes, and in addition to
    them many single sermons and newspaper essays, and contributed
    more than two thousand octavo pages to American periodicals. His
    commentaries are those on the Hebrews, Romans, Revelation,
    Daniel, Ecclesiastes, and the Proverbs. He printed his first
    Hebrew Grammar without points, and _set up about half the
    paradigms of verbs with his own hands_.--This grammar went
    through three editions, each one being more full than the
    preceding."

3. The intelligence of the Spanish Press is highly amusing.

4. The charge made against the Editor of the Oxford Edition of Milton
requires proof or explanation.

    "Mr. Whittier states in the National Era, that the carefully
    prepared Oxford edition of Milton's Works, contains a poem by
    Elizabeth Lloyd, of Philadelphia, purporting to have been
    written by the poet in his old age and blindness, and which is
    so well executed, as to have deceived the English editor of his
    works. This poem is now going the rounds of the American press,
    as the production of Milton."

5. The appearance of the fifth and sixth volumes of Lord Mahon's History
of England has thus brought forth the indignation of the editor of the
Boston (U. S.) "Transcript."

    "They commence at the year 1763, and close with the year 1779,
    and comprise, of course, as the principal theme, the American
    Revolution--the rise and progress of the War of Independence.
    'One point in the American War,' says the Spectator, 'Lord Mahon
    brings out quietly and impressively--the personal falsehood of
    Franklin, and often the brutality of the Americans at large.'
    Here will be a chance for our American reviewers and critics.
    'The personal falsehood of Franklin!' It will take the affidavit
    of more than one Lord to make that credible."

6. The old American bookseller, whose career was so graphically
described by Dr. Francis at the celebration of the hundred and
forty-sixth anniversary of Franklin's birth-day, by the New York
Typographical Society, was the father of the present Editor of the
Literary World, an American periodical, extremely well conducted, and of
considerable circulation.

    "There are many booksellers and publishers," observed Dr.
    Francis, "whose character and influence might justly command
    detailed account. Spence himself would find among them anecdotes
    of consideration in the world of letters, I must, however, write
    within circumscribed limits. The first in immediate recollection
    is Evert Duyckinck. He was a middle-aged man when I was a boy
    occasionally at his store, an ample and old-fashioned edifice,
    at the corner of Pearl Street and Old Slip. He was grave in his
    demeanor, and somewhat taciturn; of great simplicity in dress,
    accommodating and courteous. He must have been rich in literary
    occurrences. He for a long while occupied this excellent stand
    for business, and was quite extensively engaged as a publisher
    and seller. He was a sort of Mr. Newbury, so precious to
    juvenile memory in the olden times. He largely dealt with that
    order of books, for elementary instruction, which were popular
    abroad, just about the close of our revolutionary war and the
    adoption of our Constitution, Old Dyche and his pupil Dilworth,
    Perry, and Sheridan. As education and literature advanced, he
    brought forward, by reprints, Johnson and Chesterfield, and
    Vicesimus Knox, and a host of others. His store was the nucleus
    of the Connecticut teachers' intellectual products, and Barlow
    and Webster, and Morse and Riggs, found him a patron of their
    works in poetry and school books. Bunyan, and Young, and Watts,
    Doddridge and Baxter, must have been issued by his enterprise in
    innumerable thousands throughout the whole thirteen States; and
    the old English Primer, now improved into the American Primer,
    with its captivating emendations, as

        The royal oak, it was the tree
        That saved his Royal Majesty;

    improved by the more simple diction,

        Oak's not as good
        As hickory wood;

    and the lines,

        Whales in the sea
        God's voice obey;

    now modified, without loss of its poetic fire,

        Great deeds were done--
        By Washington--

    led captivity captive, and were circulated without limits for
    the better diffusion of knowledge and patriotism throughout the
    land. As our city grew apace, and both instructors and their
    functions enlarged, he engaged in the Latin Classics. Having a
    little Latin about me, it became my duty to set up at the
    printing-office of Lewis Nicols, Duyckinck's reprint, De Bello
    Gallico. The edition was edited by a Mr. Rudd. He was the first
    editor I ever saw; I looked at him with school-boy admiration
    when I took him the proofs. What alterations or improvements he
    ever made in the text of Oudendorp, I never ascertained. This,
    however, must have been among the beginnings of that American
    practice, still so common among us, of deeming it necessary that
    the reprints of even the most important works from abroad should
    have, for better circulation, some name as editor inserted on
    the title-page. Mr. Duyckinck was gifted with great business
    talents, and estimated as a man of great punctuality and rigid
    integrity in fiscal matters. He was the first who had the entire
    Bible, in 12mo. preserved--set up in forms--the better to
    supply, at all times, his patrons. This was before stereotype
    plates were adopted. He gave to the Harpers the first job of
    printing they ever executed--whether 'Tom Thumb' or 'Wesley's
    Primitive Physic,' I know not. The acorn has become the pride of
    the forest--the Cliff Street Tree, whose roots and branches now
    ramify over the land. Duyckinck faithfully carried out the
    proverbs of Franklin, and the sayings of Noah Webster's
    Prompter. He was by birth and by action a genuine Knickerbocker."




                   OF WHITGIFT'S HOSPITAL AT CROYDON.


[Illustration]

At p. 77 of your "Current Notes" for October last, there is an engraved
representation of the Corporate Seal of Dulwich College; as a companion
to it, I have procured a drawing of the Seal of Archbishop Whitgift's
Hospital at Croydon, which was founded towards the end of the reign of
Elizabeth, by that benevolent but superstitious prelate, who appears to
have been a devout believer in the Black Art, as among the crimes
enumerated to be punished by expulsion are "obstinate heresye, sorcerye,
and any kind of charming or witchcrafte."

There were some interesting relics preserved in this establishment,
particularly three wooden goblets or drinking vessels, the largest of
which could hold about three pints, and bore the following inscription:

    "=What, Sirrah! hold thy peace,
    Thirst satisfied--cease.="

But I am told they have disappeared--no one can tell how or when
exactly. I mention the circumstance, as there was a singular legend
connected with this inscription, which I once heard, but do not now
remember the particulars--perhaps some of your correspondents may.

                                                               C. R.




                          MONUMENTAL BRASSES.


                                            St. Margaret, Rochester,
                                                Feb. 11th, 1852.

SIR,--Allow me to correct a slight error in the communication of your
correspondent G. E. S. contained in your "Current Notes" for December
last, p. 92. The name of the gentleman who was mainly instrumental in
restoring the _Brass_ with the Effigy of a former Vicar of this Parish,
Thomas Codd, was the late _Mr. W. F. Harrison_, not _Hanson_, as
printed.

                                        I am, Sir, yours obediently,
                                   A SUBSCRIBER AND CONSTANT READER.
Mr. Willis.




                      CAVENDISH'S LIFE OF WOLSEY.


SIR,--In an anonymous treatise, entitled, "Who wrote Cavendish's Life of
Wolsey?" London, 1814; (usually attributed to the Rev. Joseph Hunter),
the writer considers the author to be a George Cavendish, a branch of
the Devonshire family. But in the valuable collection of my friend Mr.
W. S. Fitch, of this town, there is a well-preserved MS. copy of "The
Life and Death of Cardinal Wolsey," by Th. Gainsford. This interesting
MS. is a folio volume of 166 pages. It embraces all that is contained in
Cavendish's "Life of Wolsey," with a considerable deal of extra matter.
I refer to Lowndes and find that this Gainsford was the author of a Life
of Perkin Warbeck, and other works. He printed nothing, it seems, after
1619.

                                        I am, Sir, yours truly,
                                                       A SUBSCRIBER.
Ipswich, Feb. 6, 1852.




                     "ROBBED BETWEEN SUN AND SUN."


                                                      Jan. 28, 1852.

SIR,--Perhaps the query of "Y. S. N." concerning the expression of

                     "ROBBED BETWEEN SUN AND SUN,"

(p. 6, of your "Current Notes,") may be derived from the definition of
Burglary, in Blackstone's Commentaries, book 4, Public Wrongs, section
2. "The _Time_ must be by Night, and not by Day, for in the Day-time
there is no Burglary.... Anciently the Day was accounted to begin only
at Sun-rising, and to end immediately upon Sunset."

Therefore, if I was robbed last night, the Burglary was committed
between the _Sun_-set of yesterday, and the _Sun_-rise of to-day.

                                                    Yours,
                                                        MERVINENSIS.
    Mr. Willis.




                    "CROMWELL BETWEEN THE PILLARS."


SIR,--I extract the following out of the copy I got from you of
"Smeeton's Reprints," which answer one of the queries put by your
correspondent in last month's "Current Notes," p. 7, concerning the
print of Cromwell.

    "The following is a History of this celebrated Print:--

    "Faithorne, with his master, Robert Peake, engaged in the King's
    service, and were both taken prisoners at Basing House, from
    whence Faithorne was brought to London, and confined in
    Aldersgate; here resuming his occupation, he produced the
    exquisite Portrait of the Protector, (known as Cromwell between
    the Pillars), which pleased the parties then in power so much,
    that shortly after, it occasioned his being set at liberty, and
    he retired to France. Copies of the original print have been
    known to sell as high as 40 pounds!

    "Mr. Caulfield in his Chalcographiana, says, Mr. Bull the
    celebrated Collector, shewed him the original drawing in red
    chalk from which Faithorne engraved the print; from whom he also
    learned the face was afterwards altered to William III."

                                                            "OGILS."




                       PRINT OF OLIVER CROMWELL.


SIR,--I have a beautiful impression of the Print alluded to by a "Young
Print and Portrait Collector," ("Current Notes" for January, p. 7), with
this superscription: "Oliver Cromwell, Lord Protector of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, and the Territories thereunto belonging.
Engraved by Chas. Turner, from the celebrated print by W. Faithorne."
Below the figure of the Protector, on a small ornamental tablet, is "The
Emblem of England's distractions, and also of her attained and further
expected Freedom and Happiness;" which sufficiently explains the
extraordinary allegorical figures which crowd the print.

                                                        Yours,
                                                               S. S.




                         AUTOGRAPHIC BIOGRAPHY.


SIR,--Perhaps some of the readers of your "Notes," can inform me who is
the "Kendall" who signs a document, a fragment only of which I possess,
and that without date, which also bears the signatures "Orford," "J.
Houblon," "G. Wharton," "P. Rich," and another I cannot decypher.

                                                        Yours,
                                                               S. S.




AUTOGRAPHIC BIOGRAPHY.--The Marquis de Spinola, mentioned by ELLEN F.,
in "Current Notes" for January, p. 6, was Ambassador or Minister from
Genoa to France. He afterwards came to England on a mission from his
Government. I have many of his letters, in some of which he complains of
Lord Nelson's proceedings in the Mediterranean.

                                                               R. C.




I think p. 8 of your January "Notes," if referred to by your fair
Correspondent ELLEN F., may answer her "_Hue and Cry_" after John Bruce,
on the 20th May, 1829.

                                                            C. P. J.




                      RING OF MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS.


[Illustration]

Your Correspondent T. K.'s notice of Queen Elizabeth's ring, said to
have been given to the Earl of Essex, ("Current Notes," for December
last, p. 95), reminds me of another ring, that of Mary Queen of Scots,
for using which she was censured on her Murder-trial, in consequence of
its having the Arms of England impaled with those of Scotland. I possess
a _facsimile_ of that signet ring, procured from a seal engraved in
Edinburgh. I should feel particularly obliged if any of your Antiquarian
friends can inform me, where the original now is. I was told that it was
in the British Museum, and had inquiry made there, but to no purpose. I
rather think paste facsimiles may be had at Mr. Wilson's, formerly
Tassie's, in Leicester Square. Mine is an engraving on Amethyst, and I
shall seal this letter with it.

                                                Respectfully yours,
                                                               R. B.




A TRAVELLING NAME.--The anecdote told by your Correspondent "J." in
the last number of your "Current Notes," p. 7, is somewhat differently
related in the Memoir of Mr. James Smith, prefixed to his "Comic
Miscellanies," where it is stated: "The following incident occurred
to James Smith in a Brighton coach. An old lady struck with his
extraordinary familiarity with things and people, at length burst forth,
'And pray, Sir, you who seem to know every body--pray may I ask who you
are?' 'James Smith, Madam.' This evidently conveying nothing to her
mind, a fellow passenger added, 'One of the authors of the _Rejected
Addresses_.' The old lady stared at them by turns, and then quietly
said, 'I never heard of the Gentleman or the book before.'"

                                                            T. C. C.




SALE OF RARE BOOKS.--Some curious books of an interesting character,
collected by the son of SIMON LORD LOVAT, who, it will be remembered,
was executed for treasonable practices, have recently been sold
by Auction by Messrs. SOTHEBY & WILKINSON, of Wellington Street. The
Collection contained specimens from the presses of Pynson, Wynkyn de
Worde and Caxton; also some rare and early works relating to America,
and on the subject of English Theology during the time of the
Elizabethan Age, and some curious works on Machinery and the Occult
Sciences. Among them may be specially named, "THE BOOK OF THE ORDRE OF
CHYVALRY OR KNYGHTHODE," (lot 244), said to be one of the rarest
productions of the press of CAXTON; one of three copies, (two of which
being in the British Museum), and considered to be one of the most
interesting volumes which we owe to the perseverance of Caxton as a
translator, and of great beauty as an example of his typographic
skill. It unfortunately wanted two leaves, but produced L55. 10s. The
next in importance (lot 585) was a copy of the works of BEN JONSON,
the edition of 1640, having belonged to the Somerset family, and of
much interest from the circumstance of its containing on the inside of
the cover an unpublished Poem of twenty-six lines, of a complimentary
character, on the Nuptials of Robert Carr, Earl of Somerset, entirely
in the autograph of Ben Jonson, and concluding with the following
beautiful stanza:--

    "And when your yeares rise more than would be told,
    Yet neyther of you seeme to th' other old.
    That all y^t view you then, and late may say,
    Sure this glad payre were maried but this day."

                                             BEN JONSON.

The flattering wishes of the great Bard were however not realized in the
future history of the unhappy pair. It produced L14, and has found a
resting-place in the British Museum.




                           TO CORRESPONDENTS.


H. M.'s communication has been forwarded to the periodical for which it
appears to have been intended.

MEDIAEVAL MUMMIES. "_A Bookworm_" who dates from the "British Museum," in
type, but too long to appear this month.

[Greek: D]. Thanked.

TOBACCO. S. T. "Chester," received, and in type. The copy of the
collected edition of "Current Notes" sent as desired.

A. Oak House, in type, but must stand over until next month.

ANTONINE'S ITINERARY and ETYMONS, &c. received after G. W.'s "Current
Notes" had been made up for press.




                  =Literary and Scientific Obituary.=


CLEMENTS, William. Newspaper Proprietor (_Morning Chronicle_,
_Observer_, _Bell's Life in London_). 24th January.

CRABB, George, (M.A.) Law, Language, and History. 16, Oxford Place, New
Road, Hammersmith. 4th December. 1851. Aged 83.

DAVENPORT, Richard Alfred. History, Biography, Criticism, Poetry, &c.
Brunswick Cottage, Park Street, Camberwell. 25th January. Aged 72.

GRIMSHAW, William. School Histories, American Chesterfield, Ladies'
Lexicon. Philadelphia. 8th January.

HOLCROFT, Thomas. Periodical Writer, formerly Secretary Asiatic Society.
37, Woburn Place. 6th Feb.

PROUT, Samuel. Water Colour Painter. 10th February. Aged 68.

RODWELL, George Herbert. Musical Composer, Dramatist and Novelist. Upper
Ebury Street, Pimlico. 22nd January.

RODWELL (John). Publisher (_Rodwell and Martin, Bond Street_) of Batty's
Views, &c. January 3rd. Aged 71.

STUART (Professor), Moses. Biblical Scholar, Author of Hebrew Grammar,
&c. Andover, U.S. 4th January. Aged 71.




Transcriber Notes:

Passages in italics were indicated by _underscores_.

Passages in emphasis (cursive bold) were indicated by =equal signs=.

Small caps were replaced with ALL CAPS.

Throughout the document, the oe ligature was replaced with "oe".

Throughout the document, a single superscripted letter is represented by
that single letter preceded by a caret (^).

Errors in punctuation and inconsistent hyphenation were not corrected
unless otherwise noted.

On page 9, a double quotation mark was remove after "(p. 5),".

On page 11, a quotation mark was added before "First Books in Sciences,".

"On page 12, the double quotation mark before "The Forging of the Anchor"
was replaced with a single quotation mark.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Willis's Current Notes, by George Willis

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILLIS'S CURRENT NOTES ***

***** This file should be named 41372.txt or 41372.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/3/7/41372/

Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Ernest Schaal,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
