The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch and Judy, with Instructions How to
Manage the Little Actors, by Thomas A. M. Ward

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Punch and Judy, with Instructions How to Manage the Little Actors
       Containing New and Easy Dialogues Arranged for the Use of
       Beginners, Desirous to Learn How to Work the Puppets. For
       Sunday Schools, Private Parties, Festivals and Parlor
       Entertainments.

Author: Thomas A. M. Ward

Release Date: November 17, 2012 [EBook #41383]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH AND JUDY ***




Produced by Mark C. Orton, Ernest Schaal, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)







                            PUNCH AND JUDY,

                           With Instructions
                        How to Manage the Little
                             WOODEN ACTORS;

                               CONTAINING
                         New and Easy Dialogues
                        ARRANGED FOR THE USE OF
                      BEGINNERS, DESIROUS TO LEARN
                        HOW TO WORK THE PUPPETS.

                                --FOR--

             Sunday Schools, Private Parties, Festivals and
                         Parlor Entertainments.

                          BY THOS. A. M. WARD,
                            Attorney at Law.

                           JANESVILLE, WIS.:
                      VEEDER & LEONARD, PRINTERS,
                                 1874.




     Entered according to an Act of Congress, in the year 1874, by
                           THOS. A. M. WARD,
    In the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the Eastern District
                            of Pennsylvania.




                                PREFACE.


The Invention of Puppet Shows, Tumbling and other public amusements,
carries us back to a period in history long anterior to the birth of
MOSES.

In fact, Games of Chance, as well as the sports and pastimes usually
enjoyed in their Plays, by the early people of Egypt, were in their
zenith in the reign of the RAMESES.

RAMESES the II. was a magnificent patron of letters as well as art.

The "Sacred Library," which Diodorus mentions, has been discovered in
his Palace, the Rameseum at Karnak.

Nine men of learning were attached to the person of this King, and at
their head was a certain KAGABU, as "Master of the Rolls," (Books) a man
"unrivaled in elegance of style and diction."

From the pen of this master, who may have helped to train the mind of
MOSES, the King's adopted grandson, in "all the learning of the
Egyptians," we still possess the oldest Fairy Tale in the world, a moral
story, resembling that of Joseph and his Brethren, composed for the
King's son Meneptha, who afterwards became the opponent of Moses, at the
time of the exodus of the Jews from Egypt.

Our object is not so much with the antiquity of shows, as it is directly
with the introduction of "PUNCH AND JUDY" into polite society; in proper
character, free from superfluous verbiage, and dressing the play in
phraseology commensurate with the progress of the age--good taste and
refinement.

The performance of PUNCH in the streets of European cities, unpurified
of the vulgar colloquies put into his mouth, by the man who works the
Puppets, would not for an instant be tolerated by the people of this
country.

"The Play of PUNCH AND JUDY," observes a writer in _Harper's Monthly_,
"was exhibited for a short time at a popular place of amusement in New
York City, in 1870, but did not take sufficiently with the audience to
induce the managers to go on with it."

The true cause of its failure, at the time, doubtless arose from the
vulgar and impure language, used by the fellow that worked the Figures.

Where the little Puppets have been properly conducted, the popularity of
the show has been unbounded.

With the assistance of Mr. Cruikshank's admirable illustrations, it may
be made the medium of the most amusing whimsicalities. We are told that
so grave and dignified a personage as an English Secretary of State is
certain to be, once paused on his way from Downing street to the HOUSE
OF COMMONS on a night of important debate to witness the whole
performance.




                             INSTRUCTIONS.

                      How to Perform the Puppets.


The Frame should be three feet long and two feet wide: there should
be a space of 16 inches high, between the stage, on which the Puppets
perform, and the top of the Frame, corresponding to the ceiling of
a room, from which a little curtain hangs and in all particulars
resembling a miniature theatre, with small wings on the sides, like the
scenes in a large theatre, and a curtain in front to drop, or slide
across the stage, at the end of each act, is necessary. Immediately
above the stage is a small stick running across the top, from which a
small fringe hangs, in the style of a curtain, between this fringe and
the top of the stage, is a space of 16 inches, for the Puppets to
perform.

The hight of the stage, or floor on which the Puppets move, from the
ground upward, must be regulated by the hight of the person performing
the Figures: the stage, therefore, should never exceed two inches higher
than the head of the person who stands behind it, inside of the Frame.
This will enable the performer to rest his hands on the back part of the
stage without being seen by the audience. Without this relief for the
hands to rest on, he could not be able to continue the movement of the
Figures to any length of time.

On one end of the Frame (the stage part) is a small socket, in which the
end of a movable gallows is fixed.

The whole of the Frame is covered outside with thick cloth, to conceal
all that may be done on the inside.

Three bags hang in front of the performer--extending across the Frame;
and on the right and left hand sides, are four more pockets--two on each
side--making seven altogether; about six or eight inches deep.

In these pockets are placed the little Wooden Actors. PUNCH and the
DOCTOR, occupy the same bunk. JUDY, with her child, and the dog TOBY
have a bunk to themselves. The CONSTABLE and JACK KETCH, room together.
The NEGRO and the DEVIL have separate berths.

The way to hold the Puppets in order to exhibit them to the public:

PUNCH is always held by the showman's right hand, his head is wood of
course, and should be five inches, allowing two inches for the length
of neck would make it seven inches long, five inches from the neck to
the top of the head, with a hole, for the finger to rest in, three
inches deep. Into this little hole in the head fits the showman's fore
finger while his second finger fits into PUNCH'S right hand, and the
exhibitor's thumb sets in PUNCH'S left hand. Thus, by the aid of the
exhibitor's fore finger and thumb, PUNCH is enabled to wield the club he
carries with such consummate dexterity.

JUDY is held by the left hand and managed in the same way: thus, when
the exhibitor has PUNCH and JUDY ready to commence the show they are
said to be well mounted.

How to make the dresses and to dress the Figures.--The dress of each
Puppet is a gown fastened around its neck about thirteen inches long,
on to this is sewed the coat, shirt, vest and pantaloons. Inside of
the gown the showman thrusts his hand for the working of the little
Actor--described above. The PUNCH Puppet, has a big belly and a haunch
on his back between his shoulders, which gives him the appearance of the
Lord Mayor of London.

The Play opens by the appearance of Mr. PUNCH who calls JUDY to his aid.
Here commences the dance by PUNCH and JUDY, who bow to the audience,
then to each other and at the sound of music move off in the dance.

It is not necessary that the feet of the Puppets should be seen,
consequently they are seldom brought into view.

The person inside the Frame when dancing the Puppets, must go through
all the capers he wishes the Figures to perform; and as he is entirely
concealed from view, he can be just as funny as he pleases; and in
proportion to his comic actions will the little Actors appear to the
audience.

And strange as it may seem should the exhibitor fail to carry out these
instructions, namely: of moving his body, so as to correspond with the
motions he wishes to give the Figures, the dance of PUNCH and his wife
would be flat--without fun or any interest whatever. Therefore, remember
and fail not to put in all the comic points, (motions) for in this lies
the secret of giving life and merriment to the PUNCH and JUDY Show.




                           Act 1. Scene 1st.


(PUNCH--_is heard below with a loud squeak: he makes his appearance from
the wing on the right hand side of the stage dancing and singing. Enter_
PUNCH.)

PUNCH.--Good day little people--how do you do? The funniest man I ever
saw was old JOE MILLER. But the smartest chap among them all was JACK
the GIANT KILLER.

The biggest thing on the ice is an Elephant--he is not a pretty
bird--and never travels without a trunk. The Pig is a smaller
bird--somebody shot his feathers all off.

JUDY, my dear, come up stairs.

(JUDY _answers from below._) I am coming darling. (_Enter_ JUDY.)
JUDY.--Mr. PUNCH, did you call me?

PUNCH.--I should think I did--had you been here sooner you would have
seen the man that lived in the "House that Jack built."

JUDY.--Did you see him?

PUNCH.--I only saw one side of him--that is why I wanted you here--you
could have stood on one side, and I on the other, and then we could have
seen the whole of him at one time. _He was orful!_

JUDY.--Mr. PUNCH, you are such a funny man: now let us have a nice
little dance.

PUNCH.--With all my heart. (_They join hands--bow to the audience--then
to themselves and step off, keeping time with the sound of the music._)

JUDY.--Mr. PUNCH, I am going down stairs to bring up the BABY. (_Exit_
JUDY.)

(PUNCH--_continues to dance--a negro comes up slyly behind him and hits
him a heavy blow on the side of his head, and before_ PUNCH _gets a
glance at him, darts out of sight._ PUNCH _scratches his head, looks
about the stage--seemingly much perplexed--but is soon relieved by the
appearance of_ JUDY _with the_ CHILD. _Enter_ JUDY _with the_ BABY.)

JUDY.--Mr. PUNCH, here is our own little darling: you hold the child
while I go down in the kitchen and prepare dinner--mind you--don't you
slap or pinch it, to make it cry. (_He takes the Child. Exit_ JUDY.)

(PUNCH _sings_) "It is good to be a father," etc. (_He tries to make it
sit up--the Child cries--he again sings._)

    "Lullaby baby in the tree top,
    When the wind blows the cradle will rock."

Oh, you little tu-te-tutes--pretty bird, sit up. (_He takes it in his
lap and tries to make it sit up._) The baby want he mamma? yes, he does.
(_He becomes impatient at the noise of the Child._) If you don't stop
I'll give you a good spanking. (_Throws the Child up and catches it._)
Catchee, catchee, catchee! (_Child continues to cry and_ PUNCH _getting
angry throws it out at the window._) He! he! he! (_laughing and
singing_)

    I am not such an ugly man!
    The girls all laugh whenever they can--
    And they sing, 'there goes the ugly man!'

(_Re-enter_ JUDY.) JUDY.--Mr. PUNCH, where is the Child?

PUNCH.--Gone to sleep.

JUDY.--(_Looking around and not seeing it._) Where have you put it?--is
it in the cradle?

PUNCH.--No my dear, I put it into the soup.

JUDY.--PUNCH, where's that child? Tell me quickly.

PUNCH.--The Child cried and I dropped it out at the window.

JUDY.--I'll drop you on the floor--depend upon it--where is my stick?
(_Exit_ JUDY.)

PUNCH.--There she goes--three feet three inches and a chaw tobacco high.
(_He sings_) "there was an old woman who lived in her shoe--shoe--shew!"

(_Re-enter_ JUDY _with a stick; she comes in behind him and hits_ PUNCH
_a square blow on the back of the head before he is aware._)

JUDY.--You monster--I'll teach you how to hold a child--you nasty puke.

PUNCH.--So-o-oftly--JUDY my dear so-o-oftly! (_rubbing the back of his
head with his hands_) don't be a fool!

JUDY.--You'll drop my poor child out at the window will you? (_hitting
him continually on his head._)

PUNCH.--Don't JUDY--stop I tell you--a joke is a joke.

JUDY.--You cruel man--you think it is a joke do you--it is no joke with
me to have my poor dear child beat to death! I'll show you how to use a
child. (_Hits him._)

PUNCH.--I don't want to learn--are you in earnest?

JUDY.--Yes (_hit_) I (_hit_) am. (_hit._)

PUNCH.--Leave off I tell you. What! you refuse? do you?

JUDY.--I won't leave off. (_Hits him._)

PUNCH.--Very well my lady; now comes my turn. (_He snatches the stick
from her, and strikes her on the head while she runs about to different
parts of the stage to get out of his way._) How do you like that? old
gal, and (_hitting her_) that?

JUDY.--Mr. PUNCH, you ought to be ashamed of yourself to strike a woman!
a helpless woman like me--get out with you.

PUNCH.--If a horse kicks me I'll kick him back if I can--if a dog bites
me I'll bite _him_--_you take that_ (_hits_) and one more (_hits her
again--she falls to the floor; PUNCH is alarmed._) No, no; I won't hit
you again. JUDY (_he lifts her up_) don't cry--let's make up and never
quarrel again! (_He kisses her,_ JUDY _puts her arms around his neck and
lovingly forgives him._)

JUDY.--Don't you never strike me any more.

PUNCH.--No never! now my dear go down stairs and take care of the
baby--you be good to me and I'll be good to you. (_Exit_ JUDY. PUNCH
_sings_)

    I am a jolly shoe-maker my name is Dick Ale,
    I am a bit of a beast for I live in a stall,
    With an ugly old wife and a tortoise shell cat,
    I mend boots and shoes with a rat-a-tat-tat.

(_Re-enter_ JUDY.) JUDY.--Mr. PUNCH, have you seen Polly Hopkins?

PUNCH.--No I haven't seen her since she had the measles.

JUDY.--Well now since you are in such good humor let us join in a nice
little dance.

PUNCH.--Of woman kind I do admire but one and you are she my dearest
dear, therefore it shall be done. (_They bow to the audience, then to
themselves and dance off:_ PUNCH _singing the tune and both keeping time
to the music. Exit_ PUNCH _and_ JUDY.)

(_Enter DOCTOR and SERVANT._) DOCTOR.--He is not here (_to the negro_)
JOE, you go through the house--find Mr. PUNCH and tell him I want to see
him.

JOE.--Yes sir--I spec he is in de house. (_Exit_ JOE.)

(_Enter_ PUNCH, _who is addressed by the_ DR.) DR.--Is your name PUNCH?

PUNCH.--Yes I am PUNCH--who are you?

DR.--Well sir I am a Doctor.

PUNCH.--Why I am not sick!

DR.--That may be--I have restored to health your little child.

PUNCH.--DR. you are a good fellow. Come and see me some time when I am
not at home.

DR.--Mr. PUNCH, my charge for curing the child is fifty dollars.

PUNCH.--Sir: do you take me for the Bank of England?

DR.--Well, to be liberal with you I will throw off one half.

PUNCH.--I will not be outdone in liberality--I will throw off the other
half!

DR.--Mr. PUNCH, if you don't pay me I will send the sheriff for you.

PUNCH.--(_Looking for his stick--the_ DR. _flies for his life._) Lucky
for you old chap or I would have made a pill of you.

(_Enter_ Miss POLLY HOPKINS.) POLLY.--How do you do sir? I am looking
for the man who lived in the house that Jack built.

PUNCH.--(_aside_) Oh, good gracious what a pretty girl: in the language
of Shakspear, I am the man.

POLLY.--Why your name is Mr. PUNCH, I know you!

PUNCH.--Yes, (_aside_) how on earth did that little girl learn my name?
My little daughter, there are said to be one hundred rooms in my
house--but I never could find but ninety--where the other ten are I
never knew. But there are about one thousand big Norway rats who live in
this house--run riot all night and don't pay no rent. Three days ago I
wrote on a number of pieces of papers for the rats to leave--one of
these papers was put in every rat-hole in this house.

POLLY.--Have they left?

PUNCH.--_I don't hear no noise for two days_--I think they are making up
their minds to seek homes elsewhere.

POLLY.--Did you ever catch any of them?

PUNCH.--Oh, yes, bless you, I made a pot-pie of big fat rats but I could
not eat it. I never did like rats any way you can cook them.

POLLY.--What did you do with the pot-pie?

PUNCH.--I gave it to my wife's poor relations.

POLLY.--Mr. PUNCH, 'mother says you are my grandfather's great
uncle--when I was a little child you promised me a dollar!'

PUNCH.--I remember it, that was six years ago. (_He sings and dances._)
It is nice to be a father. (PUNCH _puts_ POLLY _through a course of
spelling._)

POLLY.--Uncle, you won't forget the dollar?

PUNCH.--No. Now I want you to spell sugar. (_She tries and fails._)
Follow me my child--now, s-u-g-a-r. (_She repeats the letters but fails
to tell what they spell._)

PUNCH.--What does that spell?

POLLY.--I don't know.

PUNCH.--What does your mother put in her tea?

POLLY.--A spoon!

PUNCH.--Bah! sugar my child.

POLLY.--Uncle, don't forget the dollar.

PUNCH.--I'll not forget it--now, POLLY, follow me--(_he proceeds and she
repeats_) m-i-l-k--what does that spell?

POLLY.--Sugar.

PUNCH.--No it don't: What do you get in your little mug every morning,
when you go round the corner, for your mother?

POLLY.--Whiskey!

PUNCH.--That will do, now go to bed. That child is more than seven years
old! _He starts_ POLLY _off to bed and as she makes her exit, she
exclaims_, Uncle, don't forget the dollar!

PUNCH sings--

    "Polly put the kettle on we will all drink tea,
    Barney let the girls alone and let them quiet be."




                                Act II.


(_Enter Policeman, accompanied by black_ JOE, _the_ DOCTOR'S _servant._)

JOE.--Yes sah, I know him--he can't fool dis child: (_looking about him
he espies_ PUNCH) dah he--dah he is! Dat him--dat's ole PUNCH.

PUNCH.--Here's a pretty brace of ducks. (_The Policeman at the sight of_
PUNCH'S _stick, sneaks off unseen by the negro, leaving poor_ JOE _all
alone with_ PUNCH.)

JOE.--I ain't no duck.

PUNCH.--I am going to eat a live _nigger_ raw.

JOE.--Moses in de mountain--you don't catch dis child. (_Exit_ JOE.
PUNCH _lies down on the stage and while watching for the darkie falls
asleep._ JOE _slily crawls up to him and plants a fearful blow on the
right side of_ PUNCH'S _head; and suddenly dodges out of sight._ PUNCH,
_springs up but too late to get a sight of his enemy, he conceals
himself behind the scenes and remains on watch._ JOE _slily crawls up to
his side of the stage and conceals himself behind the curtains. But_
PUNCH _sees him and crawling over unseen, on his hands and knees, to_
JOE'S _corner, returns for his club--as before--returns and hits the
negro an awful blow and flies to his own corner._)

JOE.--You nasty ole turkey nose--I'll catch you yet--I'll put hot lead
in your ear. (JOE _hides behind the curtain._)

(PUNCH _crawls over to_ JOE'S _side again and deals him two blows in
rapid succession._ JOE _falls down and_ PUNCH, _supposing the fellow to
be dead, throws him over the stage; and then sings,_

Oh, lay me in my little bed.                             (_Exit_ PUNCH.)

(_Enter_ BLIND MAN: _at the same time an_ IRISHMAN _from the opposite
side of the stage._)

IRISHMAN.--Is your name PUNCH?

BLIND MAN.--No, I am blind.

IRISH.--Sure, and how should I know that? troth I would rather see than
be blind--it is an unlucky counthry--this that makes a man go blind
before he gets hungry--bad luck to the day I left Ireland. (_Exit_
IRISHMAN.)

(_Enter_ PUNCH.) PUNCH.--Ah, is that you BLINDY. Where are you from
last?

BLIND MAN.--From beyond the sea.

PUNCH.--Old man, you used to be good at jumping once, how is it now?

B. M.--I was something of a jumper in my day.

PUNCH.--(_Leading him to an old well._) Now, here is a level place, let
me see how far you can jump--there's a half a dollar for you.

(B. M. _gets ready, makes a jump and lands at the bottom of the well._)

B. M.--Help--help, help me out, I am blind!

PUNCH.--Stick to it old fellow--keep the thing going and I will go for
assistance. (_He starts off, singing._)

    "Down in the coalmines underneath the ground,
    Where a gleam of sun-shine never can be found,
    Digging dusty diamonds all the season round:
    Down in the coalmines underneath the ground."

                                      (_Exit_ PUNCH. _End of Act II._)




                                Act III.


               (_Enter_ ALDERMAN MALLEN _and_ CAPT. FRANK.)

FRANK.--He is said to be a mighty smart man, but I think we can take
him.

ALD. M.--Well, if we can't no one else need try.

(_Enter_ PUNCH, _singing._)

    For I am one of the olden time,
    And may be thought too gay,
    Like Jersey Sam the Farmer's man,
    Hurrah! hurrah! hurra.

FRANK.--Leave off your singing, Mr. PUNCH, for we have come to make you
sing on the other side of your mouth.

PUNCH.--Well sir, who are you?

FRANK.--Don't you know me?

PUNCH.--Never saw you before.

FRANK.--That is all gammon: I know you well enough; I had a pretty hard
fight with you once.

PUNCH.--I always like a man better after I have fought with him. Who
sent you here?

ALD. M.--You are wanted at the Mayor's office. Col. Wood says you once
killed a Policeman in Chicago.

PUNCH.--No body cares for that. I won't go.

FRANK.--Besides, you killed the DOCTOR'S servant, black JOE.

PUNCH.--He killed me.

ALD. M.--How can that be?

PUNCH.--I was dancing by myself and the fellow came up behind me and
knocked me down--if you don't believe it, I can show you how it was
done.

ALD. M.--Well, for one, I should like to see about how it was done.

(PUNCH _hits him a heavy blow on the side of his head and suddenly makes
his exit._)

(_The_ ALDERMAN _and the_ CONSTABLE _conceal themselves behind the
curtains and remain on the watch for their enemy._)

ALD. M.--I say FRANK, he is a tricky old fellow.

FRANK.--Yes, one wants to be on his guard. He is as quick as lightning,
but we must take him--cost what it may, and we have got to do it before
he reaches the engine house, on the corner of 10th and Filbert street,
the firemen are all friendly to him--so are the children of the city.

ALD. M.--I'll take him if I have to summon the whole of the Fourth Ward.

(PUNCH _is heard from below; the parties quickly conceal themselves
behind the curtain and await his approach. Enter_ PUNCH _singing._)

    Charley Buff has money enough,
    Charley Buff lives over the shore,
    And when he dies he'll close his eyes and never see money more.

(_At this part of the play the_ ALDERMAN _and the_ POLICEMAN _spring up
behind him and after a hard struggle they pin him in a corner, and
finally carry him off, while he lustily calls out,_ "Help! murder!" etc.
_End of Scene I._)

_SCENE II.--The curtain rises at the back of the stage, and discovers_
PUNCH _in Prison._

(JACK KETCH _enters with a gallows on his shoulders. He fixes it on the
platform of the stage, and exits._)

PUNCH.--There goes a hang-dog looking fellow whom they doubtless keep to
feed hogs--the fellow's face resembles a side of sole leather, with a
slit in it which he calls a mouth.

(_Enter the_ CONSTABLE. _He examines the Gibbet and exits._)

PUNCH.--There goes the man that stole the butcher's dog.

(_Enter two men with a coffin--they set it down on the platform and
exit._)

PUNCH.--Hello, there goes two scoundrels--body snatchers. What grave
have they been robbing?

(_Re-enter_ JACK KETCH.) JACK KETCH.--Now, Mr. PUNCH, you may come out.

(PUNCH _walks out._) PUNCH.--JACK, what have you got on your face?

J. K.--I wear a mask because I am the public executioner. It was my
ancestor who cut off the head of Ann Bowlin, Catherine Howard, Lady Jane
Gray and Mary, Queen of Scots, and now I am going to execute you--for
killing the DR.'S servant.

PUNCH.--No you don't, if you do I'll be hanged.

J. K.--Why did you kill old JOE?

PUNCH.--In self defence.

J. K.--PUNCH that won't do--you are too tough to live.

PUNCH.--JACK, the old devil will never get all that is due him, until he
gets you in his bony arms.

J. K.--That's all bosh: your time is nearly up. I want you to put your
head into this halter and I'll give you the best swing you ever had.

PUNCH.--JACK, if my head was in that rope, I would not take it out, but,
as it is out, I'll never put it in.

J. K.--Mr. PUNCH, be a good fellow--you are a considerable burden to me
and I want to get the load off my hands; oblige me by being hung, here
is the noose, just put your head in here.

PUNCH.--Through that place there? (_Pointing to the noose._) I don't
know how.

J. K.--It is very easy: only put your head in that loop,--here,--take
the noose.

PUNCH.--What so? (_Poking his head on one side of the noose then on the
other side._)

J. K.--Not so, you fool.

PUNCH.--Mind, who you call fool: try if you can do it yourself: only
show me how it can be done--old pestilence and I'll try.

J. K.--Very well; I will, you see my head and you see this loop. Put it
in, so. (_Putting his head through the noose._)

PUNCH.--And pull it tight, so! (_He pulls the body forcibly down, and
hangs JACK KETCH._) Huzza! huzza! (_PUNCH takes down the corpse and
places it in the coffin. Enter two men who remove the gallows and then
carry away the coffin containing the body of JACK KETCH and exit._)

PUNCH.--There they go; they think they have got me in that coffin. (_He
sings_)

    Let the wild world wag as it will
    I'll be merry merry still.
    Jack Ketch is dead and I am free
    I don't care if old Nick himself should come for me.

(_During his singing he beats time with his stick._)

    I am the man to manage them all,
    Here's a stick to thump old Nick,
    If ever he pays me a call.

(_Enter the_ DEVIL. _Peeps in at the corner, and exit._)

PUNCH.--(_Much frightened, and retreating as far as he can._) Oh dear!
oh Lord! What is that? That's old Nick, sure enough. (_The_ DEVIL _comes
forward._ PUNCH _stands on the defensive._)

PUNCH.--Keep off, Mr. DEVIL. (_The_ DEVIL _advances_) Look out for your
eyes. (_The_ DEVIL _darts at_ PUNCH, _who escapes and aims a blow at
him: the_ DEVIL _eludes it, as well as many other blows which_ PUNCH
_aims at him, laying his head on the platform, and slipping it rapidly
backward and forward, so that_ PUNCH _instead of striking him, only
repeatedly hits the boards. Exit_ DEVIL.)

PUNCH.--He, he, he! (_laughing._) He is off: He who runs away will live
to fight another day.

(_A noise in the background is heard._)

(PUNCH _alarmed by hearing a strange, whirring noise, like that made by
a spinning-wheel, retreats to the corner of the stage._)

(_Re-enter the_ DEVIL, _with a stick. He makes up to_ PUNCH, _who
retreats round the back of the stage, and they stand eyeing one another
and fensing at opposite sides. At last the_ DEVIL _makes a blow at_
PUNCH _which tells on the back of his head._)

PUNCH.--Take care of my head! What is that for? Old boy, can't we be
friends. (_The_ DEVIL _hits him again._ PUNCH _now begins to be angry._)
Well, if you won't be a friend, we will be enemies, now, old DEVIL. I
take the chances in this contest, your head or mine, we must try which
is the best man PUNCH or the DEVIL.

(_Here commences a terrific combat between the_ DEVIL _and_ PUNCH.
_Compared with which the fight between the French and the Prussians, if
you leave out the guns, was more than boy play. In the beginning,_ PUNCH
_has much the worst of it; but, at length succeeds in planting several
heavy blows in the small of the_ DEVIL'S _back. This weakens the old
Father of evil, and towards the conclusion_ PUNCH _drives his enemy
before him. The_ DEVIL _stunned by repeated blows, falls down, when_
PUNCH _kills him; and putting him on his shoulder carries him round,
exclaiming_,) Huzza! huzza! the DEVIL'S dead.




                            PUNCH AND JUDY!

    This amusing entertainment, comprises twenty-four little Actors
                 (wooden puppets), sixteen of which are

                          TALKING MARIONETTES,

               Perform all the parts of the Fairy Play of
                            PUNCH AND JUDY:

                  Introducing, therein, characters from

                LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD, ROBIN HOOD, JACK
             THE GIANT KILLER, and the Funny Little Man who
                  lived in the HOUSE THAT JACK BUILT,

                   CAN BE SECURED ON REASONABLE TERMS
        For Evening Parties, Birthday Festivals, Sunday-schools,
                    Fairs, Societies, or Excursions.

         Communications by mail or otherwise promptly answered.
    Office. 821 Filbert Street, Philadelphia.
                                                  THOMAS A. M. WARD.


    D. H. ROCKHILL.                                  I. MILTON RAAB.
    SETH THOMAS.                                     WM. M. PURNELL.

                              SETH THOMAS.
                          ROCKHILL AND WILSON,
                         Tailors and Clothiers,

                          MEN AND BOYS' WEAR.

                      603 and 605 Chestnut Street,
                              PHILADELPHIA.




                      Trego's Teaberry Tooth Wash.

                         A Superior Dentifrice,
                FOR PRESERVING THE TEETH AND IMPARTING A
                  DELIGHTFUL FRAGRANCE TO THE BREATH.

        This Wash has long been in use in Philadelphia where it
          is highly recommended as a dentifrice; incomparably,

                      THE PUREST AND BEST ARTICLE
                            OF THE KIND EVER
                   OFFERED TO AN INTELLIGENT PUBLIC.

                       A. M. WILSON, Proprietor,
         Apothecary, N. W. Corner of Ninth and Filbert Streets,
                                                   PHILADELPHIA.


                         LARGE TEMPLE OF FANCY!
                         CHILDREN'S CARRIAGES,
                             OF ALL KINDS.

                  Wagons and Carts, Base Balls, Bats,
                 MARBLES, ROLLING HOOPS, JUMPING ROPES
                                CROQUET,
                            AND OTHER GAMES,
                  Dominoes, Cards, Slates and Pencils,
                Flags, Real Meerschaum and other Pipes,
        Amber Tubes, Beads, Canes Mounted with Gold and Silver,
                   Ivory and Plain, of our own Make.

          New Toys, Fancy Goods and Novelties always receiving
                   and selling at the lowest prices.

               PUNCH AND JUDY FIGURES CONSTANTLY ON HAND.

                           GEORGE DOLL & CO.,
                               Importers,
             NOS. 10 AND 12 NORTH SIXTH ST., PHILADELPHIA.
          N. B.--CANES and PIPES neatly mounted and repaired.




                           ESTABLISHED 1857.
                             JOHN W. KLINE,
                      ANTIQUITIES AND CURIOSITIES
                              OF ALL KINDS
                            BOUGHT AND SOLD.


       Mr. Kline would invite the attention of collectors to his
       extensive stock of

           Coins, Medals, Minerals, Fossils, Gems, Antiques,
          Shells for collections and work, Articles of Vertu,
               Postage, Revenues, Match, Proprietary, and
                   Department Stamps, India, Canton,
                     Sevres and rare China, Clocks,
                       Watches, Candlesticks and
                         Snuffers, Indian Stone
                             Implements and
                                Pottery,
                           Bronzes, Mosaics,
                           Seals and Armor,
                         Pipes, Birds' Eggs and
                      Nests, Engravings and Scrap
                   Prints, Idols from India and China,
              Skeletons and Crania, Crests and Monograms,
                     Corals and Sponges, Stamp and
                          Monogram Albums, etc.

        Price Catalogue Sent Free on the Receipt of the Address.

    Wanted to purchase, United States Revenue, Match, Medicine,
    Proprietary, Department and Confederate Stamps, Coins, China,
    and curiosities of every description.

    In remitting money, if over two dollars (which may be sent
    either in currency or un-used U. S. postage stamps) always send
    P. O. order or Banker's draft, payable to order.

                             JOHN W. KLINE,
                    Importer of Postage Stamps, &c.
                112 SOUTH EIGHTH ST., PHILADELPHIA, PA.




                         Confectioner & Caterer
                                --FOR--
                         PARTIES AND WEDDINGS.
                             J.H. BRUSSTAR,
                       1119 Spring Garden Street.

                               * * * * *

                            TAYLOR & PRICE,
                        IMPORTERS AND DEALERS IN
                 SWISS, FRENCH AND NOTTINGHAM CURTAINS,
             Upholstery Goods, Curtains and Window Shades,
              And all kinds of Cabinet Maker's Materials.

                      No. 11 North Charles Street,
                            BALTIMORE, M. D.

                               * * * * *

                          J. H. PILLEY & SON,
                             PAPER HANGINGS
                                  AND
                             WINDOW SHADES,

                       1103 Spring Garden Street,
                                           PHILADELPHIA.

            COMPETENT WORKMEN FOR CITY AND COUNTRY TRADE




                             F. LOGUE, JR.,
                             --DEALER IN--
                               HATS, CAPS
                                  AND
                              STRAW GOODS.

                         No. 926 Market Street,
                              PHILADELPHIA.

                               * * * * *

                             F. EBERHARDT,
                         IMPORTER AND DEALER IN
                           FRENCH AND GERMAN
                                BASKETS,
                                TOYS AND
                         PUNCH AND JUDY FIGURES.

                          No. 928 Arch Street.
                              PHILADELPHIA.




                              SIGNOR BLITZ
                           CAN BE ENGAGED FOR
                       SUNDAY AND PUBLIC SCHOOLS,
                           SOCIETIES, LODGES
                          AND PRIVATE PARTIES!
                        IN THE CITY AND COUNTRY.

         Apply at No. 503 Chestnut Street, or at his Residence,
         1831 Wallace Street.

                               * * * * *

                           Chegaray Institute
                      FOR YOUNG LADIES AND MISSES,
           Established by MADAME CHEGGARY in New York, 1814.

                  MADAME D'HERVILLY, -- -- Principal,

                   Nos. 1527 and 1529 Spruce Street,
                                               PHILADELPHIA, PA.

                               * * * * *

                             JOHN THORNLEY,
                503 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia, Pa.,

                Manufacturer and Dealer in All Kinds of
                              INDIA RUBBER
                        AND GUTTA PERCHA GOODS.




                           THEO. I. HARBACH,
                              IMPORTER OF
             Slides for the Magic Lantern and Stereopticon!
                         Novelties a Specialty.
                      Enclose Stamp for Catalogue.

                 809 Filbert Street, Philadelphia, Pa.

                --> MAGIC LANTERNS AND SLIDES WANTED.

                               * * * * *

                           TEMPLE OF FASHION!

                           MRS. M. A. BINDER,
            1101 N. W. Corner Eleventh and Chestnut Streets,

                   IMPORTER OF GLOVES IN EVERY SHADE,
               MILLINERY FOR LADIES AND MISSES, IMPORTED
               BONNETS AND HATS, LADIES' DRESS TRIMMINGS,
                       REAL AND IMITATION LACES,
     Parasols, Fans, Ribbons, Ties, French Jewelry and Fancy Goods,
    Dress and Cloak Making in the most tasteful and elegant manner.
                  PAPER PATTERNS WHOLESALE AND RETAIL.

                               * * * * *

                        WILLIAM A. DROWN & CO.,
                          UMBRELLA AND PARASOL
                             MANUFACTURERS,

                           246 Market Street,
                                   PHILADELPHIA.

              Warerooms in New York, 498 and 500 Broadway.




                             G. A. SCHWARZ,
                            --IMPORTER OF--
                          TOYS AND FANCY GOODS

                               --ALSO--
                         Punch and Judy Figures
                              OF ALL SIZES
                 FOR PUBLIC AND PARLOR ENTERTAINMENTS,
                        OF WOOD AND PAPER-MACHE,
                     WITH FRAMES FOR PERFORMING THE
                                PUPPETS.

                           FANCY CHINA WARE,
                              MUSIC BOXES
                                --AND--
                            OTHER NOVELTIES

                            ALWAYS RECEIVING
                                --AND--
                     Selling at the Lowest Prices.

                       No. 1006 Chestnut Street,
                                           PHILADELPHIA.




                              HELMBOLD'S
                              DRUG STORE,
                           Continental Hotel.

                             PRESCRIPTIONS
                          CAREFULLY COMPOUNDED
                               --WITH--
                       Pure Drugs and Chemicals.
                            OPEN ALL NIGHT.

                              IMPORTER OF
                       FRENCH, GERMAN AND ENGLISH
                               PERFUMERY,
                            SOAPS, POMADES,
                           TOILET ARTICLES, ETC.

                  COMPLETE LINE OF LADIES' REQUISITES.

                           PRINCIPAL AGENT OF
                   ATKINSON'S LUBIN'S and LETCHFORD'S
                               PERFUMERY.
                           SOLE AGENT FOR THE
                           Golden Hair Fluid,
                         L'AUREOLINE DE ROBARE,

           Patronage of the Public is Respectfully Solicited.
                          ALBERT L. HELMBOLD,
                           Philadelphia, Pa.




                           Transcriber Notes:

Passages in italics were indicated by _underscores_.

Passages in bold were indicated by =equal signs=.

Small caps were replaced with ALL CAPS.

Throughout the document, the oe ligature was replaced with "oe".

Throughout the dialogues, there were words used to mimic accents of the
speakers. Those words were retained as-is.

Errors in punctuation and inconsistent hyphenation were not corrected
unless otherwise noted.

On page 3, a quotation mark was added after "Master of the Rolls,".

On page 6, "bigest" was replaced with "biggest".

On page 8, "Punch where's that child tell me quickly" was replaced with
"Punch, where's that child? Tell me quickly"

On page 11, a comma was added after "Uncle" in two instances of "Uncle,
don't forget the dollar".

On page 12, a closing parentheses was added after "and exit."

On page 14, "and exit" was replaced with "and exits".

On page 14, a period was added after "Mr".

On page 15, a comma was added after "Not so".

On page 15, a closing parentheses was added after "and then sings,"

On page 16, a semicolon was added after "There they go".

On page 16, a period was added after "stands on the defensive".

On page 16, a comma was added after "Keep off".

On page 16, a comma was added after "Old boy".

On page 16, a quotation mark was removed after "Huzza! huzza! the
Devil's Dead!"

On page 17, "dentrifrice" was replaced with "dentifrice".






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch and Judy, with Instructions How
to Manage the Little Actors, by Thomas A. M. Ward

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH AND JUDY ***

***** This file should be named 41383.txt or 41383.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/3/8/41383/

Produced by Mark C. Orton, Ernest Schaal, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

