Project Gutenberg's Highland Targets and Other Shields, by James Drummond

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Highland Targets and Other Shields

Author: James Drummond

Release Date: December 1, 2012 [EBook #41527]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIGHLAND TARGETS AND OTHER SHIELDS ***




Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.)









  HIGHLAND TARGETS
  AND OTHER SHIELDS.


  BY JAMES DRUMMOND,
  R.S.A., F.S.A. SCOT.


  Edinburgh:
  PRINTED BY NEILL AND COMPANY.
  1873.




(10.)

_Read before the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, April 1871._

_The_ FIFTY COPIES _now printed for private circulation contain additional
matter, with different and more numerous illustrations._




There is a class of Scottish antiquities to which hitherto comparatively
little attention has been paid by the archaeologist. I mean the warlike
weapons, offensive and defensive, of our Highland forefathers, many of
which were used down to a comparatively recent period. Of these weapons
much ignorance seems to prevail even among the Highlanders themselves, who
almost invariably answer inquiries as to their age, that they had no doubt
they had been used from time immemorial.

In England, and on the Continent, much interest has been taken in the
study of arms and armour. On the Continent, the books are endless; in
England there are the works of Meyrick, Grose, and Skelton, with Boutell's
"Monumental Brasses and Slabs," and others of a kindred nature, all
showing how much instruction may be gained by such inquiries when followed
out in a proper spirit. In Scotland, we certainly have M'Ian's
"Highlanders," and the "Costume of the Clans" by John and Charles Sobieski
Stuart, both admirable works, but treating more of dress than of the
armour and weapons, which, though alluded to, can scarcely be said to be
illustrated, and without delineation they are almost valueless, as so
much, in these weapons, depends upon the ornamental detail for character.

At present I wish to call attention only to one of these Highland weapons,
the _Targaid_ or Target. No weapon of war has, at different periods and
among different nations, assumed so many forms as the shield. It was
square, oblong, and kite-shaped. The brass mounting of one of the last
form, which was found under 6 feet of moss on the hill of Benibreae, in
Lochaber, with other brass ornaments for a shield or armour, shown in the
accompanying woodcuts, has been deposited in our Museum by Cluny
Macpherson, Castle Cluny. The shield assumed a variety of other forms, it
was triangular, crescent, and fiddle-shaped, concave and convex; it was
hollow and fluted, also oval and circular, varying in size from being
large enough to protect the whole body to the small mediaeval hand shield,
which was no larger than the iron or bronze boss of the Scandinavian or
Anglo-Saxon shield. During the 15th and 16th century, a sort of tilting
shield was introduced; it was made to fit the shoulder, sometimes covering
the chin also, and was screwed to the armour. I have one of these, which
is cross-barred lozenge-ways, and between the spaces is elaborately
engraved.

[Illustration: Elongated Bent Plate of Thin Brass, 25 inches long, and
Circular Plate, 13 inches diameter, with Boss of Thin Brass, 8 inches
long, found at Benibreae.]

The circular and oval forms seem to have been the most common and the most
continuous in their use, and it is with these we have at present to do.
The round shield was an early Greek, Etruscan, and Roman form, it was also
used by the Assyrian, Mexican, and Indian nations, and is still used by
many of the savage tribes of Africa. On the Trajan column, both the Romans
and Dacians, again, have them nearly all of an oval form, while on the
Roman sculptured stone found near Carriden,[1] Linlithgowshire, the
ancient Britons have them of an oblong-square, with a boss in the centre,
while the Roman soldier's is of an oval shape. With one of this form,
convex and radiating from the central umbo, a Roman soldier is armed on a
bas-relief found at Housesteads, Northumberland[2]. The Scandinavian and
British shield of bronze was circular, and was chased or struck up in the
metal itself, generally having a large boss in the centre, with a series
of concentric circles, between which the space was filled up with rows of
small nail-head-like studs. Those found at Yetholm,[3] and now in our
Museum, are beautiful specimens of this class. They have also been found
in Ireland, and one very similar to these last, but with fewer circles,
was this year got in Lough Gur, County Limerick. Occasionally there are
more large bosses than the central one, these again surrounded by smaller
studs in rows. Of this variety there are good specimens in the British and
Copenhagen Museums. Underneath the central boss is the handle.

[Illustration: Handle and Studs of Bronze Shields.]

On many of the early sculptured stones in the north-eastern counties of
Scotland, such shields are represented, but whether of bronze or wood it
is impossible to say. On a stone at Benvie, a figure on horseback has a
shield having a central boss with a series of concentric circles, and
figures on the cross near Dupplin Castle have the same; these may be of
bronze, such as the Yetholm specimens, while, on a fragment from Dull,
Perthshire, now in the Museum, figures are represented having shields with
a large central and four smaller bosses. A figure is represented on the St
Andrew's sarcophagus carrying a shield of an oval form, which has the
narrow ends hollowed out, and a large central boss. On the Irish crosses
such shields are also figured. On one of these in the street of Kells,
county Meath, a battle is represented, the combatants on one side having
simple round shields and swords, while the others are armed with spears
and shields having an enormous spike or pointed boss, of which there is
also one on a fragment at Jarrow, Durham. The shields of the chiefs,
sculptured on their tombstones in the West Highlands, seem invariably of a
triangular form, and on one slab alone, at Kilmory, Knapdale, does the
shield seem circular. I should suppose, however, that the wooden shield
was more common than the bronze one, from the immense number of bosses
which have been found all over the country, the wood having rotted away,
leaving the bosses which are of iron or bronze. The iron specimens had
often a bronze rim; occasionally they were plated with silver, and in some
rare cases overlaid with a thin plating of gold.

[Illustration: Fragment of Dull Cross.]

[Illustration: Sarcophagus at St Andrew's.]

[Illustration: West Highland Chief.]

During the excavations in the peat mosses of Thorsbjerg and Nydam, in
South Jutland or Slesvig, under the sanction of the Danish government, and
conducted by Conrad Engelhardt, between the years 1858 and 1863, remains
of wooden shields were found in great abundance, these being thin boards
varying in breadth from 3 to 9 inches, the average thickness 1/2 to 3/4 of
an inch. Although hundreds of these were found, only three complete
shields could be made up. The diameter seems to have been from 22 to 44
inches; in the centre was the opening across which the handle was placed,
over this opening was fixed the metal boss or umbo; on one piece only was
found the remains of leather, the outer rim seems to have been protected
by an edging of bronze. Occasionally the shields were highly ornamental,
from having thin plates of bronze, cut into a sort of heraldic-looking
pattern, riveted to them.

Numerous iron and bronze bosses have been found in Anglo-Saxon graves,
and to judge from the length of the rivets to attach these, the shields
were 1/2-inch thick, in this respect resembling the Scandinavian
specimens. One was found in Yorkshire in a perfect state, having a bronze
boss and a metal rim. We are told of a king of the Goths in the year 553,
the supposed age of these Scandinavian and Anglo-Saxon shields, who,
standing in the front of his band of warriors, received so many of the
Roman javelins in his shield, which thus became so heavy that he was
unable to hold it up, and was killed while his attendant was changing it
for another. From this it would seem that the shield must, sometimes at
least, have been of stronger material than those found in England or
Slesvig.

[Illustration: Wooden Shield, found in Blair-Drummond Moss.]

The reading of this incident suggested to me that there was in our Museum
the pieces of some circular object, very much decayed, and called in the
old catalogue a wooden wheel, but, from the loose way in which the pieces
were put together, it was difficult to say what it had been. On examining
it, Mr Anderson and I were certain it could not have been a wheel, seeing
that when it was carefully put together it was oval. I was now confirmed
in my conjecture that it had been a shield, there being enough to show
that the centre had been hollowed out for the handle, which, being raised
on the outside, would form the boss. It, and part of another, were found
in Blair-Drummond Moss, and presented to the Museum by the late Henry Home
Drummond, Esq. The fragments of another were found in the same moss in
1831: and, somewhere near it, a mortar or hand-mill, fashioned from the
section of an oak; "there were also some flint arrow heads." Fortunately
for comparison, a perfect specimen has been found since in Ireland, in the
parish of Kiltubride, county Leitrim; it is 26-1/2 inches long by 21
inches broad, and half an inch thick. Besides the boss, which is perfect
and 3 inches high, there are seven slightly raised concentric circles, the
whole carved out of one piece of wood, in this respect differing from the
Blair-Drummond one, which is composed of three pieces most ingeniously put
together by two mortises through the whole breadth, into which are put two
pieces of wood about 2 inches broad and half an inch thick, these not only
holding it together but preventing warping, while the centre is a solid
piece of wood hollowed out for the hand, and is 7-1/2 inches in diameter,
the two edges gradually bevelled up to make them join firmly. The shield
is 2 feet long, 1 foot 7 inches broad, and at the thickest part 1-3/4
inch, and gradually thinning towards the outer edge, where it is about 1
inch. From this it will be seen that such a weapon in the hands of a
powerful man who could use it would be an admirable defence, as in the
case of the king of the Goths. Certainly shields of wood, half an inch
thick, such as those found in Jutland and England (and the same may be
said of the Irish one), would have been quite useless against the Roman
javelins; and even Mr Engelhardt was puzzled how they could have been kept
together to be effective, seeing he only found in one piece out of the
hundreds any trace of dowelling.

[Illustration: Section of Wooden Shield.]

There can be no doubt that the Highland target is the traditional
continuation of these early bronze and wooden shields, which evidently
were the successors of the Cetra, or small round shield made from the skin
of some animal, and mentioned by Tacitus as having been used by the
Britons and also by the Mauritanians, who, he says, made it of elephants'
skin. These must have resembled the shields used by some of the African
tribes and North American Indians at the present day. They are almost
invariably made of wood and covered with leather, the instances to the
contrary, when they have been made of iron or steel, being the mere whims
of individuals. One such is represented in the portrait of the Hon. James
Campbell, son of John Lord Glenorchy (1708); another, having a formidable
spike, is in my own possession,[4] and resembles one I have seen, said to
have been used by an Earl of Marr, but there is nothing whatever of
Highland character about them, being simply the iron or steel target
formerly used in other European countries, which were occasionally
embossed and engraved in a most elaborate manner. One of these, of Italian
workmanship, is preserved in our Museum, having on it a classical subject
in high relief, of the best style of this art during the 16th century. A
curious Dutch shield of iron, belonging to Mr Charles Lees, R.S.A.,[4] is
convex and covered with large bosses, some round and some of triangular
form. It looks like a pageant shield.

The leather of the Highland shield is very generally embossed with Celtic
ornamentation,--a sort of repousse work, in the form of the twisted
interlacing ribbon pattern, with scroll leafage filling up odd corners of
the design, and now and then rude attempts at animals.[5] On one belonging
to Sir J. Noel Paton there is a galley, a fish, and a nondescript kind of
animal; and among those in the Museum is one with birds and grotesque
animals surrounding its outer margin, sometimes initials and a date, the
whole design divided by concentric circles of brass nails and bosses, the
latter often engraved; in this style of ornament they resemble the early
bronze shields, with their bosses and smaller studs; sometimes they are
bound by a brass or steel rim.

[Illustration: Boss.]

[Illustration: Boss.]

Occasionally the shield was converted into a formidable weapon of offence
by having a strong and long pike screwed into the centre. This can easily
be understood when the manner of fighting adopted by the Highlanders is
considered. On approaching the enemy, "after discharging their pieces,
they threw them away, as was their custom, drew their broadswords," raised
their targets, and rushed forward before the smoke had cleared away,
generally scattering their opponents by the fury and impetuosity of their
attack, as was the case at Killiecrankie, Prestonpans, and other
engagements. In the coat of arms granted to M'Pherson of Clunie in 1672,
and emblazoned upon the green banner of the clan, the supporters are two
Highlanders dressed as they fought at the Battle of the Shirts--each is
armed with a shield having this long spike. Rae also tells us, in his
history of the Rebellion in 1715, that the Laird of Luss joined the
Highland host followed by "forty or fifty stately fellows, in their hose
and belted plaids, armed each of them with a well-fixed gun on their
shoulders, a strong handsome target, with a sharp-pointed steel of about
half an ell in length screwed into the navel of it," &c. These targets
generally have so much similarity in design, that we cannot help thinking
they must have been made at one place in great quantities. In the
specimens figured by Skelton, Logan, and Dr Stuart, this likeness is very
apparent.

The question naturally suggests itself, Where were these made? As a rule,
not in the Highlands; my own opinion being that, for the West Highlands,
at all events, they were made in Glasgow. In confirmation of this opinion,
my friend the late Joseph Robertson told me that, in the MS. account of
one of Queen Mary's masques, Highlanders are mentioned as appearing in
their native dress of skins, and having Glasgow targets. Mr Dickson was
kind enough to make search for this, but did not succeed in finding it,
although he also thinks he saw it somewhere taken notice of.

Nothing is more difficult than to assign dates to Highland weapons of
almost any sort, from the retention of forms and styles of ornamentation
of a very early, down to a comparatively recent period, unless the weapon
bears undoubted evidence of antiquity. Now and then a date is found upon
Highland Targets, and by comparison of design and workmanship a date may
be given to others of similar manufacture. Sometimes again, when the
history of a particular target is known, it may be of no value whatever in
determining the date of others which may have been used at the same time;
such a one is at Cluny Castle, said to have been the property of Prince
Charles Edward, but unfortunately it is of French manufacture, and has
nothing whatever of Celtic character about it; instead of the usual
decorations, it has patches of silver chasing in the form of warlike
weapons and emblems, while at the centre, in the place of a boss, is a
chasing in relief of the Medusa's head. In the armoury at Warwick Castle
was a rival shield of similar design, also said to have been used by the
Prince. This was unfortunately destroyed during the fire at the castle in
1871.

The same difficulty as to date is experienced with Scandinavian weapons of
various sorts, and is well illustrated in a quaint kind of powder-horns,
very antique in design, on which are carved a series of the heroes of
antiquity, each armed with a circular shield, which at first sight looks
very like the Highland target; but on examination it has a large central
boss, with a series of studs between it and the rim, not unlike bronze
specimens in the Museum at Copenhagen, like these also in having only one
handle. I have two powder-horns of this kind, on one of which the date is
only 1739; while on the other, which is evidently of an earlier period,
there seems a fringe of some kind round the outer rim of all the shields.

In the quaint account of the Duke of Somerset's "Expedicion into
Scotlande" in 1547, "Set out by way of Diarie, by W. Patten," there is
notice taken of the "Targetts" used by some of the Scots at the disastrous
battle of Pinkie. "Nye this place of onset, whear the Scottes, at their
runynge awey, had let fall their weapons (as I sayd) thear found we,
bysyde their common maner of armour, certyn nice instrumentes for war (as
we thought). And they wear, nue boordes endes cut of, being about a foot
in breadth, and half a yarde in leangth; hauyng on the insyde, handels
made very cunnynly of ii cordes endes: These a Gods name wear their
targetts again the shot of our small artillerie, for they wear not able to
hold out a canon. And with these, found we great rattels, swellyng bygger
than the belly of a pottell pot, coouered with old parchement or dooble
papers, small stones put in them to make noys, and set vpon the end of a
staff of more then twoo els long, and this was their fyne deuyse to fray
our horses when our horsmen shoulde cum at them: Howbeeit bycaus the
ryders wear no babyes, nor their horses no colts, they coold neyther
duddle the tone nor fray the toother: so that this pollecye was as witles
as their pour forcedes." The above must not be looked upon as the ordinary
military shield, but rather as an extemporised makeshift to answer the
same purpose, by the irregular troops got together so hurriedly and with
so much difficulty by the governor, the Earl of Arran, who had recourse
to the desperate measure of sending the Fiery Cross through the country to
raise the army. This old Celtic and Scandinavian custom was, even by these
nations, only used in cases of eminent peril; but when this Cross, the:--

  "Dread messenger of fate and fear,
  Stretched onward in its fleet career,
  The fisherman forsook the strand,
  The swarthy smith took dirk and brand;
  With changed cheer, the mower blithe
  Left in the half-cut swathe the scythe;
  The herds without a keeper stray'd,
  The plough was in mid-furrow staid,
  The falc'ner tossed his hawk away,
  The hunter left the stag at bay;
  Prompt at the signal of alarms,
  Each son of Alpine rushed to arms."[6]

And so it was on this occasion; the summons was at once obeyed, and a
motley, undisciplined, and poorly-armed crowd were assembled, but
unfortunately, not like the Highlanders, who were accustomed to the almost
daily use of their weapons. I have given the whole paragraph from Patten's
diary, as it clearly shows that both the "Targetts and Rattells," from the
primitive nature of their construction, had been hastily made up, and were
not "their common maner of armour." Something of the same sort may be
alluded to in a description of the armour of the Highlanders to be found
in the Wodrow MSS. under date 1678, where they are mentioned as carrying
"targets and shields of the most odde and antique forme." The _shields_
here referred to may have been like the "nue boordes endes cut of," &c.,
and used by the poorer clansmen.

[Illustration: Handles and Arm straps of Highland Targets.]

Of late years, from the great scarcity of genuine targets, imitation ones
have been much manufactured for the purpose of making up Highland
trophies, but these have entirely failed in the embossing of the leather
and engraving of the studs, where that has been attempted. This scarcity
has been caused by the severe manner in which the disarming acts of 1746
were enforced; and Boswell, describing in 1773 the armour at Dunvegan
Castle, says--"There is hardly a target now to be found in the Highlands.
After the disarming act they made them serve as covers to their
butter-milk barrels." By this means, no doubt, a number would be
preserved. In other places, again, where the target was a fine one, and
cared for by the family, the embossed leather cover, the really valuable
part, seems to have been taken off and rolled up, in which state it would
easily be concealed. This appears to have been the case with the one to
which I would specially call attention.[7] It was brought from the island
of Skye many years ago, and is not only different from the ordinary
specimens in beauty and symmetry of design, which is worked out in a
different and more artistic manner, but is also peculiar from having
embossed at its centre the heraldic cognisance of the Lord of the Isles,
of which Nesbit says, "The Macdonalds of the Isles carried, as in our old
books, a double-headed eagle displayed." Its diameter is one foot eight
inches, which is the average size of the Highland target. It must not be
thought that leather and leather-covered targets were peculiar to the
Highlands in mediaeval times; they were common in most European countries;
Spain, in particular, was famous for them, and it may not be improbable
that this was made in that country for one of the Macdonald chiefs, there
having been a great traffic between the West Highlands and Spain, hides
being exchanged for armour of all sorts, swords in particular. Spencer
also speaks, in his "View of the State of Ireland," 1586, of the Northern
Irish, especially of the Scots, as having round leather targets, often
coloured in rude fashion. In this respect they differ from those of our
Highlanders, as I am not aware of theirs ever having been painted,
although the open work of the brass ornamentation was frequently filled in
with leather or cloth of a bright colour. At the present day shields of
buffalo hide or other strong leather are in use among many of the oriental
nations; they are circular and almost invariably convex, the edges turned
up towards the front, and are often most gorgeously emblazoned in gold and
colour, having bosses of brass, silver, or even gold. In the Society's
Museum are several fine specimens; one of these has an elaborate pattern
in relief upon it, painted in purple and gold, while another has an
ornamental design painted upon it in green and gold. Among the native
tribes of Africa they are also used, being generally made from the skin of
the rhinoceros, and by the Kaffirs of an oval shape, and so large that
they act as a protection for the whole body; while the Fans use them of
many forms manufactured from elephant skin. The Nubians sometimes make
them of crocodile's skin, to which they attach much value. The shield of
the Abyssinian is convex, and made of buffalo hide with bosses of silver
or brass. Among some of the North American Indians they are also common.
The Highland target differs from those of the early Britons and
Scandinavians in having one or two arm-straps, and occasionally an
arm-piece of leather, as well as a handle; the very early shields of
bronze or wood, only having a handle below the central boss. The back of
these targets is almost invariably covered with deer skin, below which is
stuffing of some sort to deaden the effect of a blow upon the arm. On the
Trajan column all the shields seem to have the double arrangement, while
the Greeks used an arm-piece and a handle towards the rim.

[Illustration]




I.

THE MACDONALD TARGET.


This Target is covered with strong black leather, the Celtic ornamentation
on it, which is highly artistic in character, being embossed in delicate
relief, with the spaces around the pattern carefully and closely etched
with a sharp point in a sort of endless cross-hatching, thus producing a
dim flattened surface, and giving value to the raised design, which almost
entirely covers the surface, leaving no space for any of the brass
decorations so common on Highland targets. In the centre is the double
headed eagle of the Macdonalds Lords of the Isles.

[Illustration: THE MACDONALD TARGET. IN THE POSSESSION OF MR DRUMMOND,
R.S.A.]




II.

HIGHLAND TARGETS.


The two first are in the Museum of the Society of Antiquaries. The one is
of an early type and is bound with brass. On the outer circle of the
design is stamped a series of rude attempts at birds. It originally has
had a spike. The same class of ornamentation having been in use with
little variation from an early period, it is no easy matter to affix dates
to Highland and Scandinavian weapons of any sort, in such a specimen as
this, however, age is unmistakeable. The second is of a pattern not
unusual, with mountings of large bosses and triangular decorations of
brass. The third is of chaste and symmetrical design, and the last is
curious, from having worked upon it initials and a date as part of the
pattern--D. M'L. 1723.

[Illustration: HIGHLAND TARGETS.]




III.

HIGHLAND TARGETS.


The first is elaborate and uncommon in the design upon the leather, and is
more than usually rich in the variety of its brass decoration, it has
originally had a large central boss. This fine specimen was the family
target of the Campbells of Jura, and now belongs to Mr Gourlay Steell,
R.S.A. The others are very good illustrations of the ordinary class of Old
Highland targets.

[Illustration: HIGHLAND TARGETS.]




IV.

BRONZE SHIELDS.


The large shield is one of two found in 1837, during drain-making
operations near Yetholm, they are nearly similar in size and pattern.
Shortly after they were found, the gentleman to whom they belonged
exhibited them at a meeting of the Society of Antiquaries; but after his
death, they seem to have been so little cared for, that they were thrown
into a garret with other lumber, of the antiquarian kind, and when the
establishment was broken up, were bought with the rest as a _speculative
lot_ of Chinese curiosities for a few shillings; but the purchaser
fortunately offered them for sale at the Museum. This is a good
illustration how many valuables of this kind go amissing or find their way
to the melting-pot. Since then another was turned up in Yetholm Bog by a
ploughman. Such shields have been found in England and Wales as well as in
Scotland. In Ireland they are more rare, and among these few the plate
represents one lately got in Lough Gur, County Limerick.

[Illustration: SCOTTISH AND IRISH BRONZE SHIELDS.]




V.

VARIOUS SHIELDS FOR COMPARISON.


The first is a shield of crocodile's skin from Nubia, when made of this
material they were very highly prized by the natives, and consequently not
often met with in collections. This specimen is in the Antiquarian Museum.
They were oftener made from hippopotamus skin. The next is oriental and of
buffalo hide, and below it is a Dutch or German shield of iron on a strong
framework of wood, the iron covering having a series of triangular studs
struck up on its surface, while a number of circular pointed ones are
rivetted on it, surrounding the large central boss. The other is a steel
or iron shield of a class sometimes shewn in Scotland as Highland, but in
reality the same as were used in other European countries.

[Illustration: _Circular Shields._]




VI.

ROMAN LEGIONARY SCULPTURED STONE.


This splendid slab was found in 1868 on a rocky promontory within ten
yards of the sea, close by the harbour of Bridgeness, Linlithgowshire, it
was face down, and covered by about two feet of soil. It is divided into
three panels, the centre one being an inscription dedicatory to their
emperor by the second legion on the completion of a portion of the wall of
Antoninus, about A.D. 150. The panel to the right of the inscription has
sculptured on it a Roman soldier, having a rounded shield with boss,
galloping over some of the natives, who have oblong square shields with
circular bosses. On the other is a group by an altar. This interesting
relic was presented to the Antiquarian Museum by Harry Cadell, of Grange,
Esquire.

[Illustration]




FOOTNOTES:

[1] Plate VI.

[2] Museum of the Antiquaries.

[3] Plate IV.

[4] Plate V.

[5] Plates II., III.

[6] Lady of the Lake.

[7] Plate I.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Highland Targets and Other Shields, by
James Drummond

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIGHLAND TARGETS AND OTHER SHIELDS ***

***** This file should be named 41527.txt or 41527.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/5/2/41527/

Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
