The Project Gutenberg EBook of To Geyserland, by Edward F. Colborn

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: To Geyserland
       Union Pacific-Oregon Short Line Railroads to the Yellowstone
       National Park

Author: Edward F. Colborn

Release Date: December 19, 2012 [EBook #41657]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TO GEYSERLAND ***




Produced by RichardW, Greg Bergquist and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)






  Transcriber's Note: text originally italicized is rendered herein
    with underscores before and after. Small-caps are rendered as
    all uppercase.




  COPYRIGHT 1910 BY OREGON SHORT LINE
  TEXT BY EDWARD F. COLBORN    PHOTOS BY F. J. HAYNES




  TO GEYSERLAND

  [Illustration: Geyser.]

  UNION PACIFIC--OREGON SHORT LINE RAILROADS
    TO THE YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK

  Connecting with Transcontinental Trains from all points East and
    West thence through the Park by the four-horse Concord coaches
    of the M-Y STAGE COMPANY





  [Illustration: The Great Falls of the Yellowstone]




GEYSERLAND


Where in confusion canyons and mountains and swift running rivers with
painted banks abound, and elk and deer, buffalo and bear range through
the wilds unterrified by man and gun, and tall, straight pines in almost
unbroken forests plant their feet in a tangle of down-timber that
centuries were required to produce; where in the earth there are vents
through which roar and rush at exact intervals columns of boiling water,
sometimes more than two hundred feet high, or in which painted mud
blubbers and spurts; where pools by thousands at scalding heat boil and
murmur; where under one's feet is felt the hollow of the earth and
through hundreds of holes of unfathomable depth come deep growls of
Nature in her confinement; where dyes have been daubed in delirium on
hillsides and river's brink; where a canyon gashes the earth thousands
of feet through colors so vivid and varied that no record can write them
down; where one of the highest navigable lakes in the world washes the
feet of mountains that hold aloft the snows through every month of the
year; where the supernal and the infernal are blended in a harmony that
only Infinitude can produce, and every miracle of Creation has been
worked; where one can be lost in a wilderness as long as he will and
come face to face with almost every form of creative eccentricity--there
is _Geyserland_.




_The Way in and Out_


Yellowstone National Park is reached via the Union Pacific and its
connection, the Oregon Short Line, the New and Direct Route, over one
stem from Kansas City and Leavenworth, and over another from Council
Bluffs and Omaha. By way of the latter you cross the Missouri River over
a magnificent steel bridge and traverse the "Lane Cut Off," a splendid
illustration of modern railroad construction. If you journey over the
stem from Kansas City, your way leads through a succession of thriving
cities and towns amid the finest farming region of the West, and through
beautiful Denver, through Cheyenne, thence through Wyoming, and a
portion of Utah, to Ogden, from which point Salt Lake City, 37 miles
distant, is reached.

[Illustration: _The Cascades of the Firehole River_]

[Illustration: _Hayden Valley between Yellowstone Lake and the Falls_]

Leaving the central system of transcontinental lines, access to the Park
is had in a night by way of the Oregon Short Line Railroad from Salt
Lake City, Ogden, or Pocatello to the station, Yellowstone, Montana, at
the western border, nineteen miles from the Fountain Hotel.

All along this route are strewn stretches of delightful scenery, and
fields of rare fertility; but these things the tourist does not see--he
awakens for breakfast at Yellowstone, and an hour thereafter is
following the course of the beautiful Madison, well on his way into the
Park and to the wonders that there await him.




_The Scenery_


As a whole, the scenery of the Park is restful and satisfying. What it
lacks in the stupendous it makes up in softness of coloring and the
gentle undulations that lead gradually to the massive mountains. The
green of the pines, lightened and darkened here and there with the
shades of different species, is everywhere. The waters of the rivers are
dimmed by the shadows; the cascades have a glimmer and sparkle quite
their own, and now and then peep out in the sweeps of the distance,
little lakes that shimmer in the sun. Vagrant clouds of steam, signs of
the geysers and boiling springs, are seen all over the landscape,
especially in the early morning when a little of the night frost still
lingers in the air. Many grotesque shapes are taken on by the rocks, and
there is hardly a spring or pool that does not suggest its name by its
form. From the Lake Hotel can be seen facing skyward, the profile of a
human face so perfect it has long been called "The Sleeping Giant."
Yellowstone Lake is a marvel of beauty; the dense forest comes down to
its shores, little dots of islands sprinkle its surface, its waters are
crystal clear away into the deep, and under the kiss of the sun the face
of the sea takes on a glory altogether splendid.

[Illustration: _Keppler Cascades_]

[Illustration: Western Entrance]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Gibbon Falls]

[Illustration]




_Coaching in the Park_


The stage coach, the old-fashioned one with the lofty seat for the
driver and the boot and the thorough-brace, the rocking-cradle vehicle
that served so well when civilization was beating its way westward fifty
years ago, holds the first right-of-way through the Park. Driven from
use almost everywhere else by the iron horse, it has found safe refuge
there, and neither the railways nor the automobiles can enter to oppose
it.

[Illustration: _The Mud Geyser_]

[Illustration: _A Coaching Party_]

A good half of the pleasures of the tour is found in the coaching. To
watch for the coming of the stage at the door of the Inn where the
baggage is piled, and the porters and bell boys stand expectant--to hear
the clatter of the wheels, the sound of hoofs, and to see the gaily
harnessed horses in conscious pride swing the coach gracefully under the
Porte Cochere--to be wheeled over the winding, dustless roads at ten
miles an hour behind prancing leaders and wheelers--to be garbed as you
please without thought of style or detail--to breathe air distilled
among the fragrant pines--to be touched by breezes that fan your cheek
and dishevel your hair--to be free from all care and abandon yourself to
the delights that come with the everchanging scenes that panoramic
Nature is constantly unfolding to your gaze--is to experience an
exhilaration never to be found among the busy haunts of men.

The drivers, gentlemanly and skillful, are full of information, and you
do the 158 miles from Yellowstone around the circle back to Yellowstone
with so little fatigue that you regret the trip is not longer.




_Park Regulations and Improvements_


Two companies of United States Cavalry are stationed at Fort
Yellowstone, and, during the summer detachments of these troops are
placed in different parts of the reservation. Their duties are to patrol
the Park, prevent the spreading of forest fires and the commission of
acts of vandalism. The troops have authority to make arrests for any
violation of Park regulations. Hunting is especially prohibited, and all
guns are officially sealed at the entrance to the Park.

The commanding officer at Fort Yellowstone is Acting Superintendent of
the reservation. All rules and regulations emanate from the Department
of the Interior, and printed copies of them will be found posted in all
Park Hotels.

The Government has constructed a system of macadamized roads of easy
grade throughout the Park, and these are kept sprinkled daily during the
Park season.

[Illustration: _The Crater of Oblong Geyser_]

[Illustration: _Punch Bowl Spring_]

[Illustration: Grotto Geyser Formation]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Rapids above Upper Falls]

[Illustration]




[Illustration: _Upper Geyser Basin_]

_The Geysers_

Nature has lavished her gifts on the region of the Yellowstone--wild
woodland, crystal rivers, gorgeous canyons and sparkling cascades--all
under the guard of mountain sentinels around whose lofty heads group
every form of cloud castle that vagrant winds can build. But of all the
wonders that God in His mysterious way has there worked to perform, none
is so strange--so startling--as the geysers.

To count them, great and small, would be like counting the stars, and to
measure in words their awful power, or picture their splendor of sparkle
and symmetry--that, no one can do. They must be seen to be appreciated,
and once seen--the memory and mystery of them will linger to the end of
the longest life. They are as different as geysers can be. There are
dead geysers--dead from bursted throats--mere boiling pools now--shaped
to resemble a variety of familiar things; with depths that the eye
cannot sound, and colors--blues, greens, purples, reds--down their deep
sides and in the wonderful tracery about their rims, so blended, so
beautiful that one may well believe that all the paints on the palette
of the Master were commingled in their decoration.

One blubbers and gurgles and grumbles awhile, and then with an angry
roar lifts a great column of mud into the air. Another steams and growls
through an orifice hundreds of feet wide in seeming angry spite that
years ago it blew out its throat and ceased to gush forever.[A] But the
geysers that most attract are the regular-timed spouting wonders--the
Giant and Giantess, Old Faithful, the Grand, the Fountain, the Castle
and others whose names mark the geography of the Park.

[A] In 1888, Excelsior, then the greatest geyser in the known world,
while playing with unusual vigor, ruptured its crater and has never
spouted since. In its former periods of activity it is said to have
raised the Firehole river seven feet in as many minutes with its waters.
(_Ed._)

[Illustration: _The Geysers in Winter_]

They are variously located in three distinct basins which are far enough
apart to give the traveler by stage a few geysers with each day's
entertainment. These basins are great wastes of a white deposition
called in Park vernacular "the formation" under which must be boiling
one of the mighty cauldrons of the earth, for one can feel under foot a
tremble, and can hear through a hundred orifices the hiss of steam and
the angry murmur of the waters below.

The coming and going of the geysers is an astonishing and awe-inspiring
spectacle, and so accurately timed and so certain to perform are they,
that no one need miss the experience. The geyser passive is a hole at
the summit of a cone. The cone rises gradually from the plane of the
formation and, ragged and deep, growls hoarsely and steams fitfully.
Thus it is a moment before its time for activity, and then comes the
geyser active. There is a loud preliminary roar and then suddenly, with
a rush and power almost terrifying, a white obelisk of scalding,
steaming water is lifted into the air sometimes 250 feet, and there held
scintillating and glistening in the sun until the play is over, when it
sinks gradually back from whence it came, and the fitful growling and
steaming begins anew.

Every geyser has a time of its own and there are thousands of them,
varying in size from the little growler that sputters and spits a
thimbleful from its tiny throat, to the Giant that three times a month
plays for ninety minutes, 250 feet high.

How old the geysers are, recorded time does not tell, but one or two of
the wise men, who are always measuring the duration of things by some
system of calculation, have determined by multiplying the deposition
from each eruption by the height of the cone, that the Giant, for
instance, has been playing some thousands of years.

If those who come and go across the land every year on pleasure bent
only knew how curious and beautiful geysers are, the National Park would
count its visitors by multitudes.

[Illustration: Old Faithful]

[Illustration: The Great Falls From Below]




[Illustration: _Old Faithful at Sunrise_]

_Old Faithful_


In imagination, lift in a symmetrical cone two hundred and fifty
thousand gallons of scalding, steaming water one hundred and fifty feet
high and hold it there three minutes; jewel the grand fountain with a
million diamonds; filter through it the hues of innumerable dancing
rainbows; commingle in confusion every sound of splash and splutter--and
you will have a faint idea of Old Faithful in action.

It is the immutable water-clock of the Yellowstone--the most perfect
illustration of geyseric phenomena--the most famous and beautiful geyser
in the whole world.

The note of the beginning of the play of the geyser is an angry growl
down deep in its throat whence almost instantly the water, in rapid
recurrent leaps, forms the stately fountain that plays for three minutes
and then slowly sinks into the earth to await its time to rise again.
Sometimes the winds unfold from its top an iridescent banner of spray;
but more often the fountain form is a perfect cone.

Old Faithful plays every seventy minutes and never disappoints. Visitors
to the Park may therefore see it under various conditions of light. In
the daytime, under the sun, it glistens and gleams with prismatic hues;
but the most enchanting hour to witness its performance is that when
night is falling--when the dusk is around it, and the last faint tints
of the sun linger in the sky. Then it is a spectre in ghostly white
standing against the sombre background of the wilderness--a sight
strange and startling and never to be forgotten.

It has long been the custom at Old Faithful Inn to flood the geyser at
night with the rays of a searchlight. Then the spectacle takes on new
features--all the rainbow hues are there, and looking through the
fountain along the sweep of light, one sees a bediamonded form more
beautiful than any ever wrought by the hands of the Ice King.

Verily, Old Faithful is one of the most wonderful presentations in all
the repertoire of Nature.




[Illustration: _The Great Falls from Point Lookout_]

_The Canyon and Falls of the Yellowstone_


The Canyon and Falls of the Yellowstone beggar description. They are
twin wonders in a Wonderland. Is there any other gorge as gorgeous as
that Canyon? With such gaiety of coloring--with such delicate and lovely
shades of yellows and reds, purples and pinks, greens and crimsons, all
commingling in harmony from the green-fringed brink, down, down the
craggy sides into sombre depths where the writhing, gleaming ribbon of
river thousands of feet below, plunges along on its winding way to the
sea?

And the falls--the drapery of the canyon--the two silvery curtains that
hang at its head--a great river pouring over a precipice and falling in
glassy sheets hundreds of feet, then ruffling and flouncing and
festooning until lost into the rainbow-hued mist at their feet.

See all this as thousands have and thousands will from "Inspiration
Point"--a rocky balcony over the gorge, with the eagle's nests below
you--or from "Artist's Point" on the other side, where Moran transferred
the glories of canyon and falls to canvas; or see it from any of the
other places where tourists love to linger and look, and you will see
the most tremendous, stupendous, alluring and altogether splendid
spectacle that Nature ever spread out for the wonder, amazement and
delight of mortal eyes.

[Illustration: MAP OF OREGON SHORT LINE, UNION PACIFIC,
OREGON-WASHINGTON RAILROAD & NAVIGATION CO., SOUTHERN PACIFIC AND
CONNECTIONS]

[Illustration: Bridge above The Rapids]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: The Upper Falls]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK Oregon Short Line Railroad]




GEYSER TIME TABLE


  _Corrected by observations made during season 1910.
   From Haynes' Official Guide--Yellowstone National Park_


  ==================================================================
     NAME         HEIGHT    DURATION      INTERVALS OF ERUPTIONS
                   FEET
  ------------------------------------------------------------------
  UPPER BASIN
    Artemesia        50    10 minutes     12 to 24 hours
    Bee-Hive        200     8 minutes     12 hours to 40 days
    Castle           75    30 minutes     26 hours (freq. misses)
    Cliff           100     8 minutes      4 to 8 hours
    Comet            60     1 minute      Irregular
    Cub (Big)        30    10 minutes     With Lioness Geyser
    Cub (Little)     10     3 minutes     With Lion Geyser
    Daisy            75     2 minutes     45 to 60 minutes
    Economic         20    10 seconds     Follows Grand and plays
                                            every 5 min. for 2 days
    Fan              60    10 minutes      4 to 6 hours
    Giant           250    90 minutes      7 to 12 days
    Giantess        150    12-24 hours    16 to 25 days
    Grand           200    40-80 minutes   2 to 20 days
    Grotto           30    30 minutes      2 to 5 hours
    Jewel            40     1 minute       5 minutes
    Lion             60     8 minutes      6 to 12 hours
    Lioness         100    10 minutes     15 to 20 days
    Lone Star        75    10 minutes      1 to 2 hours
    Mortar           30     5 minutes      2 hours
    Oblong           35     5 minutes      7 to 8 hours
    Old Faithful    150     4 minutes     65 to 75 minutes
    Riverside       100    15 minutes      7 hours
    Saw-Mill         35     2 hours        2 to 3 hours
    Spasmodic         4     2 minutes      2 to 3 hours
    Splendid        200    ----------     Ceased to play about 1892
    Surprise        100     2 minutes     Irregular
    Turban           40    20 minutes     With Grand Geyser
  ====================================================================
  LOWER BASIN
    Fountain         75    20 minutes     3 to 6 hours
    Great Fountain  100    30 minutes     8 to 12 hours
  ====================================================================
  MIDWAY BASIN
    Excelsior       300    Variable       1 to 4 hours, ceased in 1888
  ====================================================================
  NORRIS BASIN
    Constant         20    10 seconds     30 seconds
    Fearless         25    15 minutes      3 hours
    Minute Man       15     1-3 minutes    1 to 3 minutes
    Monarch         100     6 minutes      6 hours
    Mud              20-60  1-2 minutes   New, irregular
    New Crater       20     1 minute       3 minutes
    Valentine       100    40 minutes      7-1/2 hours
  ====================================================================




  A FEW OF THE IMPORTANT POOLS AND SPRINGS


  POOLS

  Ace of Clubs
  Black Sand (Deepest in Park--soundings, 300 feet)
  Cannon Ball
  Diamond
  Devil's Pump
  Devil's Well
  Emerald
  Five Sisters
  Gem
  Handkerchief
  Oyster
  Oyster Shell
  Orange
  Purple
  Punch Bowl
  Rainbow
  Sapphire
  Silver Bowl
  Sunset
  Surprise
  Three Sisters
  Tea Kettle
  Topaz
  Vault


  SPRINGS

  Arsenic
  Apollinaris
  Beauty
  Beryl
  Butterfly
  Cleopatra
  Castle
  Congress
  Devil's Ear
  Iron
  Morning Glory
  Pearl
  Peanut
  Sponge
  Soda
  Soda Butte
  Three Craters

  [Illustration: Mammoth Hot Springs]

  [Illustration]

  [Illustration: Hot Springs Cone]

  [Illustration]




[Illustration]

[Illustration]

_The Mammoth Hot Springs_


The structural features are the Mammoth Hot Springs Hotel and the
garrison of Fort Yellowstone, around which, and in the vicinity of the
springs, the landscape gardener has produced many beautiful effects.
Here are found the most remarkable terrace-building hot springs in the
world. The formation is calcareous, and the deposition by the waters has
built up through the centuries cataracts in stone of indescribable
beauty through which the paints from the earth have been mingled and
blended with a vividness of coloring and a perfection of shading that
none but the Master's hand could work.

The waters are of such extraordinary transparency that the eye can only
guess at their depth. They are held steaming and pulsating in great
over-hanging bowls, from which they gently flow down over the stony
cataracts, carving and decorating as they go. Jupiter and Pulpit
Terraces are the master-pieces of Nature here; but there are hundreds of
other curious and beautiful things to see. The drive to and from Norris
is alive with interest. It leads through the Golden Gate, and on the way
can be seen Obsidian Cliff, Roaring Mountain, Beaver and Twin Lakes and
other attractive and curious features of topography.

[Illustration: _Mammoth Hotel_]




[Illustration]

[Illustration]

_The Tame Wild Animals_


The animals of the Park are objects of peculiar interest. No sound of
gun or bark of dog is ever heard, and the animals, though wild, have
become so tame that they give only curious notice to tourists as they
pass. Deer, elk and bear roam at will throughout Geyserland. The red
squirrel and the chipmunk scamper along the roadway, and those furry
little bundles, the wood-chucks, flatten out on the rocks and take no
heed of your passing. It is an everyday sight to see deer and their
young by the roadside, and now and then you get a glimpse of an antlered
elk, with his family of cows, swimming the streams of the Park. So much
has been accomplished by law in robbing man of his terrors to the wild,
that all of the animals in the Park, except those that--like the
mountain lion and sheep, frequent places inaccessible to travelers--have
well-nigh lost their fears.

The bears, some of them wrapped in robes that would command a fancy
price, come down in the evening from their homes in the hills to feed
around the hotels. The after-dinner entertainment they afford to guests
is an everyday pleasure.

[Illustration: _Feeding the Bear_]

[Illustration: The Giant Geyser]

[Illustration: Eagle Nest Rock]




[Illustration: _New Grand Canon Hotel_]

_The Inns_


They happen along at the end of each day's drive--great roomy structures
alive with light and full of comfort and good cheer. And such inns they
are--generous lobbies to lounge in before old-fashioned fire-places,
with their blazing, snapping logs--beds to sleep in, clean and
restful--prettily furnished rooms--and cookery and service almost too
good to be true. To find all these things in a far-away wilderness is to
wonder what magic was worked to bring them all about.

The great inn at Mammoth has in its foreground, three hundred feet high,
the wonderful, many-colored, and beautifully-formed Hot Springs Terraces
which belong in the list of the water-made wonders of the Park.

One of the inns--Old Faithful--cannot be matched anywhere in the
world. It is a lofty, wide-spreading structure of logs, with a
touch of Swiss about its gables and windows. Within, the logs are
everywhere--partitions, balustrades, stair-steps, and newel posts--even
the drinking fountain is a log. It must have been a mighty task to
search the forests for all the queer forms of growth that enter into the
construction of the curious, rustic interior. And the lobby, with its
four great cheerful fireplaces--its huge corn popper--its clock and
twenty-foot pendulum, and all the log-made galleries above it--that
charms and comforts beyond the power of words to tell.

[Illustration: _Old Faithful Inn_]

The inns are located nearby the greatest marvels of the Park and their
sites have been selected to show them off with admirable skill.

From the Fountain the geysers of the lower basin can be seen at their
play.

Old Faithful Inn looks out upon a great steaming, spouting field, and
has its namesake--the glory of all the geysers--almost at its doors. So
near, indeed, is it, that all the night through, at intervals of seventy
minutes, can be heard the old monster in eruption.

On a slope that sweeps gently down to the waters sits the Lake Inn. The
forest creeps down to it on three sides, and the outlook from its goodly
porches is over the broad expanse of Yellowstone Lake--one of the
highest of navigated seas, and as passive, clear and prettily
tree-trimmed a sheet of water as there is in the world. You may reach
this inn from Thumb by steamer or by coach; but if you would have two
hours of ecstacy, take the steamer. Thumb is a lunch station, and the
lunch there is a creation.

The Canyon Inn is almost on the brink of the gorge where falls the
Yellowstone. It is a duplication in excellence of the other inns, and
when you bid it good-bye it is to begin your last day's tour of the
Park. Then comes Norris, with its geysers and its awful "Black Growler,"
and a lunch that will send the tourist on his homeward way with a
grateful heart. After that--Yellowstone--and the whistle of the engine
and the waiting Pullman--your tour is ended and the Park a pleasant
memory.

[Illustration: Golden Gate]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Pulpit Terrace]

[Illustration]




_The Stage Line_

[Illustration: _Lone Star Geyser_]


The M. & Y. Stage Company, operating from Yellowstone, Montana (The
Oregon Short Line terminus at the western entrance to the Park) is
licensed by and is under the direct supervision of the United States
Government.

The line is equipped with elegant new two and four-horse Concord coaches
and two-horse surreys, and the finest of horses.

The coaches accommodate eight and eleven passengers, the surreys three
and five passengers. The drivers have been especially selected for the
service, are well informed, and will point out every interesting feature
of the Park.

The five days' coaching over the line of this Company takes in all
interesting sights in the Park, and every effort is made by the
management to secure the comfort and pleasure of passengers.

Stop-over privileges at any Park hotel are allowed without additional
stage charge; but twenty-four hours' advance notice must be given to the
Stage Company of the coach to be taken. Parties so desiring can arrange
for special coaches or surreys for the Park trip. For further
information regarding coaches and transportation facilities through the
Park, address F. J. Haynes, President M. & Y. Stage Company, St. Paul,
Minn., or Yellowstone Park, Wyo.




THE YELLOWSTONE PARK FARES


Owing to the frequent changes of fares throughout the United States,
this publication will deal only with the round-trip fare from Salt Lake
City, Ogden, Pocatello and Yellowstone. Following fares from Pocatello
and Yellowstone are open to all passengers:--Fares from Ogden or Salt
Lake are side-trip fares available to holders of transcontinental
tickets of any class reading between Cheyenne, Denver, Colorado Springs,
Pueblo and points east thereof, on the one hand, and points west of the
eastern state line of Nevada via the Southern Pacific Company, San
Pedro, Los Angeles & Salt Lake R. R. or Western Pacific Railway, or west
of Pocatello, Idaho, via the Oregon Short Line R. R. on the other hand.

  COMPLETE TOUR OF THE PARK            From Salt Lake         From
                                       City, Ogden and    Yellowstone.
                                       Pocatello. Rail,    Stage and
                                       Stages and Hotel.     Hotels.
  Five-Day Trip via the Fountain,
  Old Faithful, Lake and Canyon Inns,    $55.50             $46.25
  Mammoth Hot Springs and Norris

  Hotel accommodations in the Park
  (thirteen meals and four lodgings)
  included in the ticket.

  Fare for children covering rail
  transportation only                      4.65

  MAIN POINTS OF INTEREST

  Four-Day Trip via the Fountain,
  Old Faithful, Lake
  and Canyon Inns and Norris              45.50              36.25

  Hotel accommodations in the Park
  (ten meals and three lodgings)
  included in the ticket.

  Fare for children covering rail
  transportation only                      4.65

  TO THE GEYSERS AND RETURN

  Two-Day Trip--among the Geysers         25.50              16.25

  Hotel accommodations in the Park
  (four meals and one lodging)
  included in the ticket.

  Fare for children covering rail
  transportation only                      4.65

   Children under eight years of age will be granted half rates
    locally in the Park, on stage lines and at hotels.

   For the season of 1911 the first date that passengers can leave
    Yellowstone (western entrance) and make the tour of the Park is
    June 16th; the last date leaving Yellowstone, September 16th.


  BAGGAGE REGULATIONS

  The baggage limit on coaches is 25 pounds. Excess rate per pound
  10 cents. Trunks are not transported through the Park. They may be
  stored free of charge at Yellowstone, Pocatello, Ogden or Salt
  Lake City, or they will be sent around to Gardiner by rail for
  tourists going out that way. Tourists entering via Gardiner and
  touring the Park by coaches operating from there, if routed out
  through the western entrance, will transfer to the M. & Y. Stage
  Line at Norris. They should arrange at Mammoth for transfer of
  baggage and Oregon Short Line Pullman reservations.

  Provisions will be made at Yellowstone station for the care of
  ladies' hats, and for cleaning and pressing clothing while
  passengers are en tour through the Park. A nominal charge will be
  made for this service.

  GERRIT FORT     Passenger Traffic Manager        OMAHA, NEBRASKA
  D. E. BURLEY     General Passenger Agent    SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH
                  OREGON SHORT LINE RAILROAD

  [Illustration: Mammoth Hot Springs]

  [Illustration]

  [Illustration: Castle Geyser]

  [Illustration]




FOR COMPLETE INFORMATION ADDRESS ANY OF THE FOLLOWING


    ATLANTA, GA.
      121 Peachtree St.     A. J. DUTCHER     _General Agent_

    BOSTON, MASS.
      176 Washington St.    WILLARD MASSEY    _New England Pass'r
                                               Agent_

    CHEYENNE, WYO.
                            E. R. BREISCH     _Ticket Agent_

    CHICAGO, ILL.
      73 West Jackson       W. G. NEIMYER     _General Agent_
      Boulevard

    CINCINNATI, O.
      53 East Fourth St.    W. H. CONNOR      _General Agent_

    CLEVELAND, O.
      305 Williamson Bldg.  GEO. B. HILD      _General Agent_

    COUNCIL BLUFFS, IA.
      522 Broadway          WILLIAM B.        _City Ticket Agent_
                              RICHARDS

    DENVER, COLO.
      935-41 Seventeenth    R. S. RUBLE       _Assistant Gen'l Pass'r
      St.                                      Agt. U. P. R. R._

    DES MOINES, IA.
      310 West Fifth St.    J. W. TURTLE      _Traveling Passenger
                                               Agent_

    DETROIT, MICH.
      11 Fort Street West   J. C. FERGUSON    _General Agent_

    HOUSTON, TEXAS
                            T. J. ANDERSON    _Gen'l Pass'r Agt.
                                               G. H. & S. A. Ry._

    HONG KONG, CHINA
      Kings Building                          _General Passenger
                                               Agent San Francisco
                                               Overland Route_

    KANSAS CITY, MO.
      901 Walnut St.        H. G. KAILL       _Asst. Gen'l Pass'r
                                             _ Agt. U. P. R. R._

    LEAVENWORTH, KAN.
      9-11 Leavenworth      J. J. HARTNETT    _General Agent_
      Nat. Bank Bldg.

    LINCOLN, NEB.
      1044 O St.            E. B. SLOSSON     _General Agent_

    LOS ANGELES, CAL.
      557 South Spring St.  H. O. WILSON      _General Agent_

    MINNEAPOLIS, MINN.
      25 South Third St.    H. F. CARTER      _District Passenger
                                               Agent_

    NEW ORLEANS, LA.
      Magazine and          J. H. R. PARSONS  _Gen'l Pass'r Agt.
      Natchez Sts.                             M. L. & T. R. R.
                                               and S. S. Lines_

    NEW YORK CITY, N. Y.
      366 Broadway          L. H. NUTTING     _General Passenger
                                               Agent So. Pac. Co._
      287 Broadway          J. B. DeFRIEST    _General Eastern Agent
                                              U. P. R. R._

    OAKLAND, CAL.
      1122 Broadway         H. V. BLASDEL    _Agent Passenger Dept._

    OMAHA, NEB.
                            GERRIT FORT      _Pass'r Traffic Mgr.
                                              U. P.-O. S. L. R. R's_
      1324 Farnam St.       L. BEINDORFF     _City Pass'r Agent
                                              U. P. R. R._

    PHILADELPHIA, PA.
      632 Chestnut St.      R. J. SMITH      _General Agent So.
                                              Pac. Co._
      841 Chestnut St.      S. C. MILBOURNE  _General Agent_

    PITTSBURG, PA.
      539 Smithfield St.    G. G. HERRING    _General Agent_

    PORTLAND, ORE.
                            WM. McMURRAY     _Gen'l Pass'r Agt.
                                              O.-W. R. & N. Co._
      Third and Washington  C. W. STINGER    _City Ticket Agent
      Sts.                                    O.-W. R. & N. Co._

    PUEBLO, COLO.
     312 North Main St.    L. M. TUDOR      _Commercial Agent_

    SACRAMENTO, CAL.
      1007 Second St.       JAMES WARRACK    _Passenger Agent_

    ST. JOSEPH, MO.
      505 Francis St.       C. T. HUMMER     _Asst. Gen'l Pass'r
                                              Agt. St. J. & G. I.
                                              Ry._

    ST. LOUIS, MO.
      903 Olive St.,        J. G. LOWE       _General Agent_
      Century Bldg.

    SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH
                            D. E. BURLEY     _Gen'l Pass'r Agt.
                                              O. S. L. R. R. Co._

    SAN FRANCISCO, CAL.
      42 Powell St.         S. F. BOOTH      _General Agent_

    SAN JOSE, CAL.
      19 North First St.    F. W. ANGIER     _Agent Passenger Dept._

    SEATTLE, WASH.
                            W. D. SKINNER    _Gen'l Pass'r Agt.
                                              O.-W. R. & N. Co._
      608 First Avenue      E. E. ELLIS      _General Agent
                                              O.-W. R. & N. Co._

    SPOKANE, WASH.
      603 Sprague Avenue    H. C. MUNSON     _City Tkt. Agent
                                              O.-W. R. & N. Co._

    SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA
      40 Pitt St.           V. A. SPROUL     _Australian Passenger
                                              Agent_

    TACOMA, WASH.
      Berlin Bldg.          ROBERT LEE       _General Agent
                                              O.-W. R. & N. Co._

    TORONTO, CANADA
      Room 14, Janes Bldg.  J. O. GOODSELL   _Traveling Passenger
                                              Agent_

    YOKOHAMA, JAPAN
      4 Water St.                            _General Passenger
                                              Agent San Francisco
                                              Overland Route_




[Illustration]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of To Geyserland, by Edward F. Colborn

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TO GEYSERLAND ***

***** This file should be named 41657.txt or 41657.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/6/5/41657/

Produced by RichardW, Greg Bergquist and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
