The Project Gutenberg EBook of April Fools, by W. F. Chapman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: April Fools
       A farce in one act for three male characters

Author: W. F. Chapman

Release Date: February 16, 2013 [EBook #42103]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK APRIL FOOLS ***




Produced by Dianna Adair, Paul Clark and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)






    Transcriber's Note:

    Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
    possible, including some inconsistencies of hyphenation.

      This is very strange. Can there he a mis--

    has been changed to

      This is very strange. Can there be a mis--

    Italic text has been marked with _underscores_.
    Bold text has been marked with =equals signs=.
    => and <= represent pointing hands.




                               ROORBACH'S
                                AMERICAN
                                EDITION
                            of ACTING PLAYS.

                              APRIL FOOLS.

                             PRICE 15 Cents

                                No. 26.

                            HAROLD ROORBACH.
                               PUBLISHER,
                               NEW YORK.


COPYRIGHT, 1889, BY HAROLD ROORBACH

Roorbach's full Descriptive Catalogue of Dramas, Comedies, Comediettas,
Farces, Tableaux-vivants, Guide-books, Novel Entertainments for Church,
School and Parlor Exhibitions, etc., containing complete and explicit
information, will be sent to any address on receipt of a stamp for
return postage. Address as above.




ROORBACH'S AMERICAN EDITION.

PRICE, 15 CENTS EACH.


 This series embraces the best of plays, suited to the present time. The
    reprints have been rigidly compared with the original acting copies,
    so that absolute purity of text and stage business is _warranted_.
    Each play is furnished with an introduction of the greatest value to
    the stage manager, containing the argument or synopsis of incidents,
    complete lists of properties and costumes, diagrams of the stage
    settings and practicable scene-plots, with the fullest stage
    directions. They are handsomely printed from new electrotype plates,
    in readable type, on fine paper. Their complete introductions,
    textual accuracy, and mechanical excellence render these books far
    superior in every respect to all editions of acting plays hitherto
    published.

 1. =ALL THAT GLITTERS IS NOT GOLD.= A comic drama in two acts. Six
    male, three female characters. Time, two hours.

 2. =A SCRAP OF PAPER.= A comic drama in three acts. Six male, six
    female characters. Time, two hours.

 3. =MY LORD IN LIVERY.= A farce in one act. Five male, three female
    characters. Time, fifty minutes.

 4. =CABMAN No. 93.= A farce in one act. Two male, two female
    characters. Time, forty minutes.

 5. =MILKY WHITE.= A domestic drama in two acts. Four male, two female
    characters. Time, one hour and three quarters.

 6. =PARTNERS FOR LIFE.= A comedy in three acts. Seven male, four female
    characters. Time, two hours.

 7. =WOODCOCK'S LITTLE GAME.= A comedy-farce in two acts. Four male,
    four female characters. Time, one hour.

 8. =HOW TO TAME YOUR MOTHER-IN-LAW.= A farce in one act. Four male, two
    female characters. Time, thirty-five minutes.

 9. =LADY AUDLEY'S SECRET.= A drama in two acts. Four male, three female
    characters. Time, one hour and a quarter.

 10. =NOT SO BAD AFTER ALL.= A comedy in three acts. Six male, five
    female characters. Time, one hour and forty minutes.

 11. =WHICH IS WHICH?= A comedietta in one act. Three male, three female
    characters. Time, fifty minutes.

 12. =ICI ON PARLE FRANCAIS.= A farce in one act. Three male, four
    female characters. Time, forty-five minutes.

 13. =DAISY FARM.= A drama in four acts. Ten male, four female
    characters. Time, two hours and twenty minutes.

 14. =MARRIED LIFE.= A comedy in three acts. Five male, five female
    characters. Time, two hours.

 15. =A PRETTY PIECE OF BUSINESS.= A comedietta in one act. Two male,
    three female characters. Time, fifty minutes.

 16. =LEND ME FIVE SHILLINGS.= A farce in one act. Five male, two female
    characters. Time, one hour.

 17. =UNCLE TOM'S CABIN.--Original Version.= A drama in six acts.
    Fifteen male, seven female characters. Time, three hours.

 18. =UNCLE TOM'S CABIN.--New Version.= A drama in five acts. Seven
    male, five female characters. Time, two hours and a quarter.

 19. =LONDON ASSURANCE.= A comedy in five acts. Ten male, three female
    characters. Time, two hours and three quarters.

 20. =ATCHI!= A comedietta in one act. Three male, two female
    characters. Time, forty minutes.

 21. =WHO IS WHO?= A farce in one act. Three male, two female
    characters. Time, forty minutes.

 22. =THE WOVEN WEB.= A drama in four acts. Seven male, three female
    characters. Time, two hours and twenty minutes.

=> _Any of the above will be sent by mail, post-paid, to any address, on
receipt of the price._


HAROLD ROORBACH, Publisher, 9 Murray St., New York.




                              APRIL FOOLS

                           A FARCE IN ONE ACT
                       FOR THREE MALE CHARACTERS

                                   BY
                             W. F. CHAPMAN

                  Copyright, 1890, by Harold Roorbach.

                             [Illustration]

                                NEW YORK
                            HAROLD ROORBACH
                               PUBLISHER




[Illustration]




APRIL FOOLS.




CAST OF CHARACTERS.


    MR. PETER DUNNBROWNE   _A gentleman with several marriageable
                               daughters._
    MR. JAMES SMITH        _Who wants to buy a horse._
    MR. JOSEPH SMITH       _An undertaker._

                TIME OF REPRESENTATION--THIRTY MINUTES.


ARGUMENT OF THE PLAY.

MR. PETER DUNNBROWNE, a gentleman with several unmarried daughters on
his hands, receives a note from MR. JOHN SMITH proposing for his
daughter Fanny. Presently MR. JAMES SMITH calls, he having received a
letter announcing that Mr. D's mare Fanny is for sale, and an amusing
dialogue at cross purposes ensues. This disposed of, MR. JOSEPH SMITH,
an undertaker, calls, he having been notified that Miss Fanny had
suddenly died, and another puzzle follows. Finally it is discovered that
the letters are all in the same handwriting, and that the receivers have
all been made the victims of an April joke.


COSTUMES.

DUNNBROWNE.--Everyday suit.

JAMES SMITH.--Very loud "horsey" dress. Carries hat and cane.

JOSEPH SMITH.--Shabby black suit, old black silk hat, black gloves,
rusty old cotton umbrella.


PROPERTIES.

Newspaper and several letters on table. Large black bordered letter for
JOSEPH SMITH. One letter each for JAMES SMITH and DUNNBROWNE to produce.
Bottle containing cold tea to represent wine, corkscrew and two glasses
for DUNNBROWNE to bring on.


SCENE.

[Illustration]

SCENE.--DUNNBROWNE'S parlor. Doors R. and L. Table C., with chairs R.
and L. of it.

N. B.--A set scene is not essential, and may be dispensed with if
preferred.


STAGE DIRECTIONS.

In observing, the player is supposed to face the audience. R. means
right; L., left; C., centre; R. C., right of centre; L. C., left of
centre; R. D., right door; L. D., left door; UP STAGE, towards the back;
DOWN STAGE, towards the audience.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




APRIL FOOLS.


 =Scene.=--_DUNNBROWNE'S parlor._ =Entrances= _R. and L. Table, C.
    Chairs R. and L. of table. Newspaper and letters on the table._

=Dunnbrowne.= (_without_) Well, good morning, my dears, (_shows himself
in the doorway R._) Don't be away all the morning, and _do_ be merciful
in your purchases. (_enters R._) Happy is the man who is not troubled
with a trio of beautiful daughters, who are incessantly going out
shopping. My daughters seem to take a delight in spending my money. I
suppose they act upon the principle that, if a thing is worth doing at
all it is worth doing well, and as shopping is their chief and only
occupation, they strive, and I may add, succeed, to do it as well as any
young ladies in this mundane sphere possibly could. (_sits R._) I find
it of no use whatever to expostulate with them about what I consider
their extravagance in dress, for they argue that as they do all the
buying and I do all the paying, it is nothing but a right and proper
division of labor. Now let me see what trouble has come to me through
that prodigious engine of commerce, the post office, this morning.
(_opens a letter_) Another bill from Messrs. Newshape and Whitestraw,
the milliners! It is only two weeks since I paid them $25. (_looks at
the bill_)--$37.50 for millinery! Enough to provide me with hats for
twenty years. (_opens another letter_) More bills! This is Mrs.
Goodfit's bill for dressmaking: forty dollars. (_throws the bill on the
table_) Oh, this is going a little beyond all reason. The fact of the
matter is, I shall be ruined if this sort of thing is not stopped.
(_walks across the room two or three times--then pauses_) I wish some
kind, upright and steady young men of affluent means would come forward
and take one or two of my daughters off my hands. I'm sure they would
make excellent wives. (_sits R.,--takes another letter_) I am almost
afraid to open this one; but I may as well know the extent of my trouble
at once--suspense is useless--so here goes. (_opens the letter_) What's
this? (_reads it over rapidly in silence_) How opportune! This is
precisely what I have long been wishing for. (_reads_) "Dear sir,--For a
long period of time I have fondly and madly loved your daughter Fanny,
with a passion that would require the prolific brain of a poet to
describe, but I have never had the courage to declare my passion to
her." Well, that _is_ astonishing. If I had known of this before I
should have avoided paying some of her bills, for I would have had them
married long ago. (_reads_) "My object in writing you is to inform you
that I shall call upon you to-morrow morning, when I trust you will
favor me with an interview." An interview! I'll favor him with forty
interviews if he will only take one of my daughters off my hands.
(_reads_) "My means are amply sufficient to justify my taking a wife, so
I trust you will not throw cold water on my hopes, but make me eternally
happy by giving your consent to our union." Throw cold water on his
hopes! By no means. If _warm_ water will help to bring about the desired
effect he shall have gallons of it. (_reads_) "Hoping you will carefully
consider this matter and ultimately arrive at a favorable decision, I am
yours respectfully, John Smith." (_folding the letter_) John Smith,
umph! Now, the question that arises is, who _is_ this John Smith? John
Smiths are almost as numerous as flies around a sugar-bowl, but _I_
don't happen to be acquainted with any of them. However, I shall not be
any wiser by wondering who he is, so I shall wait patiently until he
calls. In the meantime I will take a walk around the garden, (_goes to
door R.--calls_) Jane, I am going into the garden. If anyone calls, show
him in here and let me know immediately. (_goes to the table_)
By-the-bye I must put these bills out of sight. If John Smith chances to
see them they might set him thinking of what he will have to pay when he
gets married, and be the means of making him alter his mind. (_puts the
letters in his pocket_)

                                                               =Exit= L.

                        =Enter=, JAMES SMITH, R.

=Smith.= (_speaks at the entrance_) Very well. I'll find a seat if you
will find your master. (=Enters=--_looks around--sits, R._) I wonder
what sort of a fellow this Dunnbrowne is. I don't know anything about
_him_, but he knows something about _me_ or how would he be aware of the
fact that I am in want of a mare. I hope there is no blunder about the
affair. I don't see how there can be, though. The letter is addressed to
me all fair and square, and this is the address the letter is dated from
(_takes a letter from his pocket and reads_) "2, Belverley Terrace,
Hedgetown, March 31st. Mr. Smith. Dear sir,--A friend of mine informs me
that you are in want of a good mare, so I take the liberty of writing
you to say that I wish to dispose of my thoroughbred dark bay mare
Fanny. She has splendid action, and is in good condition. If you think
she may suit you, I shall be at home in the morning, and will be glad to
see you and give you any information respecting her soundness, &c. Yours
truly, Peter Dunnbrowne." Oh, it's all right. There cannot be any error
about that--of course not. I am rather fond of the name of Fanny. I had
a mare of that name some years ago, and she was a perfect stunner.
(_replaces the letter in his pocket_) I wonder what price he wants for
her. I am not particular to a few dollars if she's a good goer. (_takes
up the newspaper_) What is there fresh in the paper this morning? Ah,
another breach of promise case, I see. $500 damages. Poor fellow. Nobody
will catch me at that game. Marriage is out of my line altogether. I
always drive clear of the ladies. (_turns the paper over--reads_)

                           =Enter=, DUNN., L.

=Dunn.= (_aside_) So this is John Smith, my would-be son-in-law. He
appears to make himself quite at home. (_coming to the front, aloud_)
Good morning, sir. Mr. Smith, I presume. (_extending his hand. SMITH
hastily puts the newspaper down--rises and shakes hands_)

=Smith.= Good morning, Mr. Dunnbrowne, how do you do, sir; how _do_ you
do? Delighted to make your acquaintance, sir. Fine morning this, isn't
it? _Very_ fine morning indeed.

=Dunn.= (_aside_) He doesn't seem at all bashful.

=Smith.= I beg your pardon? Ah, I thought you were speaking. You _are_
well, I suppose?

=Dunn.= Ye--yes, I am quite well, thank you, Mr. Smith, how are you?

=Smith.= I'm _very_ well, sir, very well indeed; in fact I am never
troubled with any complaint excepting the complaints of my groom, and he
is always full of them--servants usually are.

=Dunn.= (_aside_) Groom! he keeps a horse, then. He must be pretty well
to do. (_aloud_) Take a seat, sir. (_they both sit, DUNN., L., SMITH,
R._)

=Smith.= Thanks. So you are desirous of disposing of Fanny, Mr.
Dunnbrowne?

=Dunn.= (_aside_) Disposing of her! (_aloud_) Well er--that is _one_ way
of putting it, but I scarcely like to----(_pause_)

=Smith.= Oh, I quite understand your feelings, sir. You have grown quite
fond of her, and now you find it rather hard to part with her; but
you'll soon get over that. I've parted with several in my time. Excuse
my asking, sir, but what are your reasons for parting with her? Do you
find her too expensive?

=Dunn.= Well er--rather; and as I have three of them to keep
I----(_pause_)

=Smith.= I see--you thought you could possibly spare one of them. Well
now, what are her good points? Is she good at jumping walls or fences?

=Dunn.= (_aside_) Walls! Fences!

=Smith.= Can she clear a five-barred gate nicely?

=Dunn.= (_smiling_) Well, er--I really could not answer that question.
Jumping is an accomplishment that I----(_pause_)

=Smith.= Perhaps you never tried her at that sort of thing. You ought
to, sir, it's fine sport. The last I had was a perfect stunner at it.

=Dunn.= (_aside_) The last he had! He has been married before, then--a
widower, evidently.

=Smith.= She turned a little stubborn occasionally, though, and has
thrown me over her head two or three times.

=Dunn.= (_aside_) Bless me! what a powerful woman she must have been.

=Smith.= I cured her of that nasty trick after she had repeated it a
time or two, I did so. I gave her the lash pretty freely.

=Dunn.= (_aside_) Why, the man is nothing less than a wife-beater.

=Smith.= She soon found out who was master. There's nothing so effective
as the whip to cure stubbornness, sir, nothing at all.

=Dunn.= I suppose not; but don't you think that kind of treatment is
rather too harsh?

=Smith.= Oh, dear no; on the contrary, I think a little now and again
does them a power of good.

=Dunn.= (_aside_) What a hard hearted fellow he must be. He will have to
alter his opinions before he marries my daughter, that he will.
(_aloud_) I may tell you, Mr. Smith, that if I thought you would
ill-treat Fanny at all, I should not allow you to take her.

=Smith.= Don't be afraid of that, my dear sir. I should not ill-treat
her if it were not necessary. Does she shy at all when she is out?

=Dunn.= Shy! That is a peculiar question to ask about a----

=Smith.= Not at all, Mr. Dunnbrowne. I like to know what I am getting.
If I take her from you and find that she shies at anything I shall get
rid of her without delay. I shall indeed.

=Dunn.= (_aside_) Well, that _is_ cool. He has the impudence to tell me
that he would "get rid" of my daughter. I am beginning to dislike this
fellow.

=Smith.= You see, Mr. Dunnbrowne, I want one who will go ahead in the
face of everything--a regular fast one that's the sort.

=Dunn.= (_aside_) What peculiar taste some men have!

=Smith.= Is Fanny ever troubled with corns?

=Dunn.= Corns, sir, _corns_? No!

=Smith.= I am glad of that. I don't care to see them walking lame in the
slightest. It quite spoils their appearance. Is she quite sound in every
other respect?

=Dunn.= Well, yes, I never heard her complain. (_aside_) What odd
questions he asks!

=Smith.= She does not cough or wheeze, Mr. Dunnbrowne, does she? She is
not broken-winded at all, is she?

=Dunn.= Broken-winded! I don't understand you, Mr. Smith. Why do you ask
so many absurd questions about her? You are not obliged to have her if
you don't choose to.

=Smith.= I am perfectly aware of that, sir. I am simply asking fair
questions. As I said before, I want to know what I am getting. I don't
want to make a blind bargain. Can I see her now?

=Dunn.= Not at present--she is out.

=Smith.= Taking exercise, I suppose. Well now, Mr. Dunnbrowne, I'll tell
you what I will do. I will take her a month on trial.

=Dunn.= You'll what, sir? You--you'll take her a month on trial! What
the dickens do you mean? How _dare_ you propose such a thing to me, sir!
(_rises_)

=Smith.= Simply because I consider that it is the fairest way of dealing
in transactions of this sort. (_DUNN. walks across stage_) You have no
occasion to be vexed at my proposal. I give you my word that I will
treat her kindly and pay all expenses during the month, and if she does
not suit me I will return her. That is fair and square for both parties,
don't you think so?

=Dunn.= No, sir, I do _not_ think so. If you have a notion that I--the
parent of three blooming daughters--am willing to permit you to trifle
and play with the affections of the eldest of them in the manner you
have so basely proposed, I must ask you to dispel that notion at once
and forever, for you never labored under a greater mistake in your life,
never.

=Smith.= Now there is just a little bit of sentiment in that speech, and
I must admit that you delivered it in a fair dramatic style, Mr.
Dunnbrowne, but you see the general effect is marred by my not knowing
what you are driving at. What _do_ you mean?

=Dunn.= Mean, sir, mean? I _think_ I explained myself sufficiently.

=Smith.= Scarcely. You volunteer some remarks about your daughters. Now,
with all the respect that is due to those young ladies, I must ask you
to put your parental feelings aside for a short time, and proceed with
the business we have on hand. Ladies are out of my line altogether.
Between you and me, Mr. Dunnbrowne, I am not a marrying man.

=Dunn.= Not a marrying man! Then what under the sun did you write me
that letter for respecting your love for my daughter, eh?

=Smith.= Write you? Why, I never heard your name before this morning.

=Dunn.= (_aside_) This is very strange. Can there be a mis--(_aloud_)
Your name _is_ Smith, is it not?

=Smith.= Yes, that is my name.

=Dunn.= Ah! (_takes a letter from his pocket and unfolds it_) Now tell
me, Mr. Smith, on your honor as a gentleman, did you or did you not
write that letter to me? (_giving the letter to SMITH_)

=Smith.= (_reads_) "Dear sir,--for a long period of time I have fondly
and madly loved your daughter Fanny with--" Oh, rubbish! On my honor as
a gentleman, Mr. Dunnbrowne, I never loved _any_ man's daughter, much
less wrote this letter; besides, it is signed John Smith and my name is
_James_. (_returns the letter_)

=Dunn.= (_aside_) I cannot understand this at all. (_aloud_) As you are
_not_ the Mr. Smith I took you for, and have _not_ come to see me about
my daughter, perhaps you will inform me what you _did_ come for.

=Smith.= What I came for? Well, that's not bad for you after listening
to all I have said. Have you forgotten that you wrote me saying you had
a mare to dispose of?

=Dunn.= Wrote you about a mare!

=Smith.= What a forgetful man you must be. (_takes letter from his
pocket--opens it and gives it to DUNN., who looks it over_) That is the
letter; perhaps it will recall the circumstance to mind.

=Dunn.= I have not written this, sir. (_keeps the letter in his hand_)

=Smith.= You have not? On your honor as a gentleman?

=Dunn.= On my honor as a gentleman.

=Smith.= That's curious. Have you not got a mare to dispose of?

=Dunn.= No; more than that I never possessed one or a horse either.

=Smith.= Then why did you not say so before? You answered my questions
about the mare Fanny and----

=Dunn.= Because I thought you were speaking of my daughter. You see I am
expecting a Mr. Smith here this morning--the writer of the letter I have
shown you--who is anxious to pay his addresses to my daughter Fanny. As
he is a perfect stranger to me, and as you answered to the name of
Smith, I naturally thought you were the gentleman I expected, hence the
confusion.

=Smith.= There is something very peculiar about this affair that
I----(_a knock is heard at the door, R. DUNN. puts SMITH'S letter on the
table--goes to the door and opens it. Short pause_)

=Dunn.= What name did you say? Oh, Smith. Ah, yes, it's all right, Jane,
show him in. (_turns to JAMES SMITH_) I must ask you to excuse me now,
Mr. Smith. The _other_ Mr. Smith has arrived. I hope you will hear
something about the mare before the day is over.

=Smith.= I hope so, Mr. Dunnbrowne. (_takes his hat and cane_)

                       =Enter=, JOSEPH SMITH, R.

=James S.= (_aside_) So this is the lover. Ah, poor fellow, (_aloud_)
Good morning, Mr. Dunnbrowne, good morning.

=Dunn.= Good morning, Mr. Smith. (=Exit=, JAMES S., R.) And good morning
to you, Mr. Smith, (_shakes hands with JOSEPH S., who is very pale and
looks very mournful_)

=Joseph S.= Good morning, Mr. Dunnbrowne.

=Dunn.= Take a seat, Mr. Smith.

=Smith.= Thank you, sir. (_sits, R., stands his umbrella between his
knees--puts his hat on the top of it and looks vacantly before him.
DUNN. sits L. of table_)

=Dunn.= (_surveying him--aside_) His appearance is not very
pre-possessing; but I must not judge him by his looks. (_aloud_) This is
a beautiful morning, is it not, Mr. Smith?

=Smith.= (_solemnly_) It is.

=Dunn.= (_aside_) He is not at all conversational. (_aloud_)
We--we--er--we have had, I may say, several beautiful mornings lately,
have we not, Mr. Smith?

=Smith.= (_mournfully_) We have.

=Dunn.= (_aside_) Umph! He must be very bashful and nervous. I'll get a
bottle of wine; perhaps it will help to bring him to the point.
(_rises--aloud_) I am going to my wine bin, Mr. Smith; you will excuse
me a moment, will you not?

=Smith.= Oh, certainly. (=Exit=, _DUNN., L.; suddenly--SMITH looks quite
cheerful_) Wine bin, eh! He does not appear to be greatly distressed
through his daughter's death. It may be that he has a large family and
does not feel her loss so keenly. Let me see now, does he say in his
letter when she died? (_takes a black bordered envelope from his pocket
and takes the letter from it--reads_) "2, Belverley Terrace, Hedgetown,
March 31st. Mr. Smith. Dear sir, I am grieved to inform you that my
eldest daughter died suddenly this afternoon. Will you kindly call here
in the morning to make the necessary preparations for her interment, and
oblige, yours truly, Peter Dunnbrowne." (_replaces the letter in
the envelope and puts it in his pocket_) So she died yesterday.
(_cheerfully_) Ah, well, _somebody_ must die or what would become of us
poor undertakers? If everybody took a notion to live on from this time
forward, the whole body of funeral furnishers would die of starvation. I
hear Mr. Dunnbrowne coming, so I must assume my customary mournful
expression. I always find that it pleases my customers. (_looks
mournful_)

  =Enter=, _DUNN. L., with bottle of wine and glasses--places them on
                 the table and begins to draw the cork_

=Dunn.= You will doubtless think it peculiar of me waiting upon myself,
Mr. Smith, when there are servants in the house, but the fact is I never
allow them to go to my wine bin, for I have discovered that they
sometimes imbibe a little on their own account, in consequence of which
I never allow the key to leave my possession. (_filling the glasses_)
Now, my dear sir, make yourself at home. (_putting a glass before
SMITH_) Taste that and tell me what you think of it.

=Smith.= (_aside_) It is not often I am treated in this manner.
(_aloud_) Thank you, Mr. Dunnbrowne. (_leans his umbrella against the
chair, and puts his hat and gloves under the seat--drinks_) This is
splendid, sir. It is really delicious.

=Dunn.= Ah, I thought you would say so. (_holds his glass up to the
light--drinks_) Is it not exhilarating?

=Smith.= It is. (_aside_) He thinks more of his wine than of his poor
daughter.

=Dunn.= (_aside_) The wine has not loosened his tongue very much yet. He
must have another glass. (_aloud_) Have another glass, Mr. Smith, it
will do you a power of good. (_re-fills SMITH'S glass_)

=Smith.= Thank you, sir. (_aside_) This is what I call good business;
but I must say that, in all my experience as an undertaker and funeral
furnisher, I never met a man who bore a daughter's death with greater
fortitude than this man does, never. (_drinks_)

=Dunn.= (_aside_) Well he _is_ a bashful fellow. Why does he not speak
out like a man? I would commence the subject myself, but he might run
away with the idea that I was anxious to get rid of my daughter, and I
should not like him to think that on any account. How quiet he sits! I
don't see any thing else for it but applying the lotion to his
refractory tongue until the desired effect is produced. (_aloud_) Come,
Mr. Smith, empty your glass and let me re-fill it for you.

=Smith.= With pleasure, Mr. Dunnbrowne. (_empties his glass. DUNN.
refills it--aside_) I am enjoying myself and no mistake. (_aloud_) Thank
you, Mr. Dunnbrowne, thank you. I'm sure you are very kind.

=Dunn.= Not at all, Mr. Smith. When business such as we have on hand is
to be transacted, we must make ourselves as sociable as possible.

=Smith.= (_aside_) Now that he has mentioned business I had better take
the hint and commence. (_turns towards DUNN., aloud_) The business that
has brought us together is not of a very cheerful character, I am sorry
to say.

=Dunn.= Do you think not, sir? For my part I do not see why it should
not be.

=Smith.= Well, er--it was of your feelings I was thinking, Mr.
Dunnbrowne, for I know that this event must be a sad and sudden blow to
you.

=Dunn.= Not at all, my dear sir, not at all. (_aside_) His letter a sad
blow to me? Pooh! I look upon it as a very pleasing blow. (_drinks and
crosses his knee_)

=Smith.= (_aside_) He speaks of a death as though it were an everyday
occurrence in his house.

=Dunn.= Such things will occur sooner or later in any family, sir. We
must expect them.

=Smith.= Ah, that is true. We never know whose turn is next, but it is a
great affliction when parent and daughter are parted in this way, Mr.
Dunnbrowne.

=Dunn.= (_cheerfully_) Oh dear no. I could not expect her to stay with
me always. Besides, we shall not be parted for ever; I can just drop in
and see her now and again, you know.

=Smith.= (_aside_) Drop in and see her! What does----Oh, I see, he must
have a family vault. (_aloud_) Her loss will be a source of immense
grief, sir, I am sure.

=Dunn.= (_in same tone_) Why should it be? All young persons are anxious
to commence that blissful state of life, for it is generally supposed
that they are better off--that is to say, they are much happier. Not
that my daughter has ever been unhappy here, but the change will be a
pleasing novelty to her, therefore I see no reason why I should be
grieved at all.

=Smith.= (_aside_) How careless he appears to be about her death, and
speaks of the next world as a pleasing novelty. A----h! (_draws a long
deep sigh_)

=Dunn.= (_aside_) What nonsense to think that I shall be grieved because
my daughter leaves my roof to begin married life! He might be arranging
for a funeral instead of a wedding, judging from the mournful manner he
has of expressing himself, although I must say that it is quite in
keeping with his appearance. (_aloud_) Fanny has always been a good
daughter, Mr. Smith, and deserves to be made happy.

=Smith.= I can believe you, Mr. Dunnbrowne, and doubt not that she will
be happy for evermore.

=Dunn.= You will do your utmost to make her comfortable when you take
her, Mr. Smith, will you not?

=Smith.= You may rest assured that nothing shall be wanting on my part
as far as comfort is concerned.

=Dunn.= I am glad to hear you say so, sir. Remember that this is a great
undertaking, but I suppose you have carefully considered the matter
before coming here.

=Smith.= I have, Mr. Dunnbrowne. The responsibilities are very heavy in
a case like this, I know, but I think I am quite able to bear them. When
do you wish the ceremony to take place?

=Dunn.= You must suit yourself in that matter, Mr. Smith, I am not
particular.

=Smith.= Very well, sir. Let me see--to-day is Monday--I do not wish to
hurry you, suppose we say Thursday.

=Dunn.= Thursday! So soon! Do not be too hasty, Mr. Smith, let us take
proper time over this matter.

=Smith.= Well, then, shall we say Friday, or Saturday at the latest? We
_must_ get it over by Saturday. It would not do to delay it beyond this
week.

=Dunn.= (_aside_) Bless us, what a desperate hurry he is in! In his
letter he tells me has not proposed to Fanny, yet he wants to marry her
this week. (_aloud_) I am not sure that we could make all our
arrangements in so short a time, Mr. Smith.

=Smith.= I can easily manage my portion of the arrangements, Mr.
Dunnbrowne, and I think you can manage yours if you make an effort. We
will say Saturday and settle that point.

=Dunn.= Very well. (_aside_) I don't know what Fanny will say to this. I
wish she would come in.

=Smith.= Well now, Mr. Dunnbrowne, what church do you intend----

=Dunn.= Oh, I don't mind. Any will suit me.

=Smith.= St. Paul's is a very neat and quiet church.

=Dunn.= Very well. St. Paul's will suit me if it suits you. I suppose
the officiating clergyman there understands his business as well as any
other.

=Smith.= Oh, certainly. I am partial to St. Paul's because of the good
and dry quality of the ground--there is none of that wet clay about it.

=Dunn.= Well that is rather a good point, Mr. Smith. (_aside_) How
considerate he is! He thinks the ground will be drier to walk on up to
the church door. I should not have given that a thought myself.
(_aloud_) Allow me to fill your glass, sir. (_re-fills SMITH'S glass_)

=Smith.= Thank you, sir. (_drinks_) I think you did not say how many
carriages would be required, did you, Mr. Dunnbrowne?

=Dunn.= No, I did not. I leave that matter entirely in your hands, Mr.
Smith. I have no doubt that you understand what is required better than
I do, so I could not think of interfering with any arrangements you can
make.

=Smith.= Thank you, sir, you do me honor. I suppose you would like to
have the church bell tolled on the morning of the----

=Dunn.= (_stiffly_) Church bell tolled! Decidedly not, sir. What under
the sun should we have the bell tolled for?

=Smith.= It is very common in these cases, Mr. Dunnbrowne.

=Dunn.= (_with determination_) Well _I_ don't want to hear it, and
moreover I won't have it tolled.

=Smith.= I am sorry to cause you annoyance, Mr. Dunnbrowne, but I
thought you would like to follow the custom in such cases.

=Dunn.= And tolling a bell at a ceremony of this sort is customary, is
it? Well _I_ never heard of it before. (_aside_) My belief is that I
have given him more wine than is good for him.

=Smith.= (_surprised_) You surprise me, sir.

=Dunn.= (_carelessly_) As you have named the matter I don't mind having
the whole peal of bells ringing together. Engage the ringers
for me, will you, Mr. Smith, and tell them to ring as many
tripple-bob-majors--or whatever they call them--as they like next
Saturday.

=Smith.= (_aside_) The wine is getting into his head or he would never
think of engaging the ringers to ring for a funeral. (_aloud_) I will
engage the ringers if you wish, Mr. Dunnbrowne, but really I----

=Dunn.= Oh, I will pay all expenses, sir.

=Smith.= (_aside_) Argument is useless while he is under the influence
of that wine. I had better bring my business to an end, and take my
departure. (_aloud_) Will you kindly permit me to see your daughter?

=Dunn.= It would give me exceeding pleasure to do so, Mr. Smith, but she
is not in at present.

=Smith.= Not in! (_aside_) Who ever heard of a corpse going out for a
walk! The man is hopelessly intoxicated. It is a blessing that I have
not been prevailed upon to take more of that wine, or I should have been
as bad as he. (_aloud_) If you will allow me to see your daughter now,
Mr Dunnbrowne, I shall not have to come here again to take the
measurements.

=Dunn.= Take the what?

=Smith.= The measurements.

=Dunn.= The dressmaker will do that, sir.

=Smith.= (_aside_) That wine again. (_aloud_) Dressmakers do not usually
take the measurements for a coffin, sir.

=Dunn.= Coffin! What are you talking about, sir? Coffin! (_aside_) The
wine has made him more garrulous than I wished. (_aloud_) What should we
want a coffin here for, eh?

=Smith.= (_aside_) He is drunk beyond doubt. (_aloud_) To put your
daughter in, sir. It is absolutely necessary that you have one.

=Dunn.= (_angrily_) Have you come here to have a joke out of me, Mr.
Smith, or to make arrangements for marrying my daughter?

=Smith.= Neither, Mr. Dunnbrowne. I came to make arrangements for
burying her as requested in your note.

=Dunn.= (_mystified_) Burying my daughter! Requested in my note! What
does this mean? Explain yourself, Mr. Smith.

=Smith.= (_takes letter from his pocket and hands it to DUNN._) An
explanation is needless. There is your letter asking me to come here and
make arrangements for your daughter's interment.

=Dunn.= (_examining letter_) I never wrote this. There is a great
mistake somewhere. (_returns letter_)

=Smith.= Then is your daughter not dead?

=Dunn.= No; she is enjoying splendid health, I am glad to say. But am I
to understand that you are really an undertaker and that your name is
Smith?

=Smith.= Certainly! Who and what did you think I was?

=Dunn.= A gentleman who wished to _marry_ my daughter--not _bury_ her.
(_takes letter from his pocket_) See, I received this letter this
morning from a Mr. Smith, who wishes to be my son-in-law--(_gives the
letter to SMITH, who looks it over_)--and I was under the impression
that you were the author of it.

=Smith.= Then your impression was a very wrong one, for I never saw this
letter before. (_returns the letter_) I am already married, Mr.
Dunnbrowne, and I may say that I have been a father on four separate
occasions. But who can have sent this letter to me?

=Dunn.= And who has sent this letter to me? I cannot understand what----

=James S.= (_without, R._) All right, miss, I know the way in. (_rushes
in_) Excuse my abrupt entrance, Mr. Dunnbrowne, but I forgot to take my
letter away, and I want to trace the hand-writing if possible.

=Dunn.= (_gives JAMES S. his letter off the table_) There it is, Mr.
Smith. Apparently you are not the only one who is in a quandary about a
letter this morning. This gentleman is not a candidate for the office of
son-in-law, as I thought. He has come here in consequence of receiving a
letter which I know nothing about, though it has my name at the foot. By
a most peculiar coincidence, his name, like yours, is Smith.

=James S.= How singular.

=Joseph S.= Yes sir, my name is Smith, general undertaker and funeral
furnisher. At my establishment all orders are promptly attended to.
Kindly make a note of it, sir, you may require my services.

=James.= (_aside, piously_) May the time be far distant.

=Dunn.= Well, gentlemen, what are we to make of this dilemma?

=James.= That's the point. Ah! I smell a rat!

=Joseph.= A rat?

=Dunn.= Bless us! where is it? (_JOSEPH S. and DUNN. mount on chairs and
look round the room in an alarmed manner_)

=James.= Don't be alarmed--it was only a figure of speech. (_to JOSEPH_)
Permit me to look at your letter, sir. (_JOSEPH and DUNN. dismount from
the chairs. JOSEPH hands his letter to JAMES, who compares it with his
own_) The same, I'm certain. (_returns JOSEPH'S letter--turns to DUNN._)
Kindly allow me to see your letter, sir. (_DUNN. gives it--JAMES compares
it with his own_) Exactly the same, by Jupiter. (_returns the letter to
DUNN._) It is as I thought. All these letters have been written by one
hand.

=Dunn.= Is it possible? But what can have been the writer's object.

=James.= Why, don't you know what day it is?

=Joseph.= I see it all. It is the first of April.

=Dunn.= So it is; and we are nothing more nor less than a trio of "APRIL
FOOLS."

                                 DUNN.
    JAMES S.                                              JOSEPH S.


                               CURTAIN.




NEW ENTERTAINMENTS.


THE JAPANESE WEDDING.

 A costume pantomime representation of the Wedding Ceremony in Japanese
    high life. The company consists of the bride and groom, their
    parents, six bridesmaids, and the officiating personage
    appropriately called the "Go-between." There are various
    formalities, including salaams, tea-drinking, eating rice-cakes, and
    giving presents. No words are spoken. The ceremony (which occupies
    about 50 minutes), with the "tea-room," fills out an evening well,
    though music and other attractions may be added. Can be represented
    by young ladies alone, if preferred. =Price, 25 Cents.=


AN EVENING WITH PICKWICK.

 A Literary and Dramatic Dickens Entertainment.--Introduces the Pickwick
    Club, the Wardles of Dingley Dell, the Fat Boy, Alfred Jingle, Mrs.
    Leo Hunter, Lord Mutanhed and Count Smorltork, Arabella Allen and
    Bob Allen, Bob Sawyer, Mrs. and Master Bardell, Mrs. Cluppins, Mrs.
    Weller, Stiggins, Tony Weller, Sam Weller, and the Lady Traveller.
    =Price, 25 cents.=


AN EVENING WITH COPPERFIELD.

 A Literary and Dramatic Dickens Entertainment.--Introduces Mrs.
    Copperfield, Davie, the Peggotys, the Murdstones, Mrs. Gummidge,
    Little Em'ly, Barkis, Betsey Trotwood, Mr. Dick and his kite,
    Steerforth, the Creakles, Traddles, Rosa Dartle, Miss Mowcher, Uriah
    Heep and his Mother, the Micawbers, Dora and Gyp, and the
    wooden-legged Gatekeeper. =Price, 25 cents.=

These "Evenings with Dickens" can be represented in whole or in part,
require but little memorizing, do not demand experienced actors, are not
troublesome to prepare, and are suitable for performance either on the
platform or in the drawing room.


THE GYPSIES' FESTIVAL.

 A Musical Entertainment for Young People. Introduces the Gypsy Queen,
    Fortune Teller, Yankee Peddler, and a Chorus of Gypsies, of any
    desired number. The scene is supposed to be a Gypsy Camp. The
    costumes are very pretty, but simple; the dialogue bright; the music
    easy and tuneful; and the drill movements and calisthenics are
    graceful. Few properties and no set scenery required, so that the
    entertainment can be represented on any platform. =Price, 25 cents.=


THE COURT OF KING CHRISTMAS.

 A CHRISTMAS ENTERTAINMENT. The action takes place in Santa Claus land
    on Christmas eve, and represents the bustling preparations of St.
    Nick and his attendant worthies for the gratification of all
    children the next day. The cast may include as many as 36
    characters, though fewer will answer, and the entertainment
    represented on a platform, without troublesome properties. The
    costumes are simple, the incidental music and drill movements
    graceful and easily managed, the dialogue uncommonly good, and the
    whole thing quite above the average. A representation of this
    entertainment will cause the young folks, from six to sixty, fairly
    to turn themselves inside out with delight, and, at the same time,
    enforce the important moral of Peace and Good Will. =Price, 25
    cents.=


_RECENTLY PUBLISHED._

 =ILLUSTRATED TABLEAUX FOR AMATEURS.= A new series of _Tableaux
    Vivants_, by MARTHA C. WELD. In this series each description is
    accompanied with a full-page illustration of the scene to be
    represented.

   PART I.--MISCELLANEOUS TABLEAUX.--Contains General Introduction, 12
    Tableaux and 14 Illustrations. =Price, 25 Cents.=

   PART II.--MISCELLANEOUS TABLEAUX.--Contains Introduction, 12 Tableaux
    and 12 illustrations. =Price, 25 Cents.=

 =SAVED FROM THE WRECK.= A drama in three acts. Eight male, three female
    characters. Time, two hours and a half. =Price, 15 Cents.=

 =BETWEEN TWO FIRES.= A comedy-drama in three acts. Eight male, three
    female characters. Time, two hours and a half. =Price, 15 Cents.=

 =BY FORCE OF IMPULSE.= A drama in five acts. Nine male, three female
    characters. Time, two hours and a half. =Price, 15 Cents.=

 =A LESSON IN ELEGANCE.= A comedy in one act. Four female characters.
    Time, thirty minutes. =Price, 15 Cents.=

 =WANTED, A CONFIDENTIAL CLERK.= A farce in one act. Six male
    characters. Time, thirty minutes. =Price, 15 Cents.=

 =SECOND SIGHT.= A farcical comedy in one act. Four male, one female
    character. Time, one hour. =Price, 15 Cents.=

 =THE TRIPLE WEDDING.= A drama in three acts. Four male, four female
    characters. Time, one hour and a quarter. =Price, 15 cents.=

=> _Any of the above will be sent by mail, postpaid, to any address, on
receipt of the annexed prices._<=


HAROLD ROORBACH, Publisher, 9 Murray St., New York.




HELMER'S ACTOR'S MAKE-UP BOOK.

_A Practical and Systematic Guide to the Art of Making up for the
Stage._

                            PRICE, 25 CENTS.

WITH EXHAUSTIVE TREATMENT ON THE USE OF THEATRICAL WIGS AND BEARDS, THE
MAKE-UP AND ITS REQUISITE MATERIALS, THE DIFFERENT FEATURES AND THEIR
MANAGEMENT, TYPICAL CHARACTER MASKS, ETC. WITH SPECIAL HINTS TO LADIES.
DESIGNED FOR THE USE OF ACTORS AND AMATEURS, AND FOR BOTH LADIES AND
GENTLEMEN. COPIOUSLY ILLUSTRATED.


CONTENTS.

I. THEATRICAL WIGS.--The Style and Form of Theatrical Wigs and Beards.
The Color and Shading of Theatrical Wigs and Beards. Directions for
Measuring the Head. To put on a Wig properly.

II. THEATRICAL BEARDS.--How to fashion a Beard out of crepe hair. How to
make Beards of Wool. The growth of Beard simulated.

III. THE MAKE-UP.--A successful Character Mask, and how to make it.
Perspiration during performance, how removed.

IV. THE MAKE-UP BOX.--Grease Paints. Grease paints in sticks; Flesh
Cream; Face Powder; How to use face powder as a liquid cream; The
various shades of face powder. Water Cosmetique. Nose Putty. Court
Plaster. Cocoa Butter. Crepe Hair and Prepared Wool. Grenadine. Dorin's
Rouge. "Old Man's" Rouge. "Juvenile" Rouge. Spirit Gum. Email Noir.
Bear's Grease. Eyebrow Pencils. Artist's Stomps. Powder Puffs. Hares'
Feet. Camels'-hair Brushes.

V. THE FEATURES AND THEIR TREATMENT.--The Eyes: blindness. The Eyelids.
The Eyebrows: How to paint out an eyebrow or moustache; How to paste on
eyebrows; How to regulate bushy eyebrows. The Eyelashes: To alter the
appearance of the eyes. The Ears. The Nose: A Roman nose; How to use the
nose putty; A pug nose; An African nose; a large nose apparently reduced
in size. The Mouth and Lips: a juvenile mouth; an old mouth; a sensuous
mouth; a satirical mouth; a one-sided mouth; a merry mouth; A sullen
mouth. The Teeth. The Neck, Arms, Hands and Fingernails: Fingernails
lengthened. Wrinkles: Friendliness and Sullenness indicated by wrinkles.
Shading. A Starving character. A Cut in the Face. A Thin Face Made
Fleshy.

VI. TYPICAL CHARACTER MASKS.--The Make-up for Youth: Dimpled cheeks.
Manhood. Middle Age. Making up as a Drunkard: One method; another
method. Old Age. Negroes. Moors. Chinese. King Lear. Shylock. Macbeth.
Richelieu. Statuary. Clowns.

VII. SPECIAL HINTS TO LADIES.--The Make-up. Theatrical Wigs and Hair
Goods.

   _Sent by mail, postpaid, to any address, on receipt of the price._


                      HAROLD ROORBACH, Publisher,
                       9 Murray Street, New York.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of April Fools, by W. F. Chapman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK APRIL FOOLS ***

***** This file should be named 42103.txt or 42103.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/1/0/42103/

Produced by Dianna Adair, Paul Clark and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
