The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Seven Ages of Man, by Ralph Bergengren

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Seven Ages of Man

Author: Ralph Bergengren

Release Date: February 16, 2013 [EBook #42110]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SEVEN AGES OF MAN ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)






THE SEVEN AGES OF MAN

Books by
Ralph Bergengren

THE PERFECT GENTLEMAN
THE COMFORTS OF HOME
_Each $1.00_

For
Younger Readers
JANE, JOSEPH AND JOHN
_Boxed, $3.00_




_The_
SEVEN AGES _of_ MAN

BY
RALPH BERGENGREN

[Illustration: colophon]

The Atlantic Monthly Press
Boston

COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY
RALPH BERGENGREN




CONTENTS

I. Baby, Baby                            1

II. To be a Boy                         17

III. On Meeting the Beloved             33

IV. This is a Father                    47

V. On Being a Landlord                  64

VI. Old Flies and Old Men               78

VII. The Olde, Olde, Very Olde Man      94




I

BABY, BABY

     _In meeting a baby, one should behave as much as possible like a
     baby one's self. We cannot, of course, diminish our size, or
     exchange our customary garments for baby-clothes; neither can we
     arrive in a perambulator, and be conveyed in the arms, either of a
     parent or a nursemaid, into the presence of the baby whom we are to
     meet. The best we can do is to hang, as it were on the hatrack, our
     preconceived ideas of what manner of behavior entertains a baby, as
     cooing, grimacing, tickling, and the like, and model our deportment
     on the dignified but friendly reticence that one baby evinces in
     meeting another._--BABY: HIS FRIENDS AND FOES.


Of the many questions that Mr. Boswell, at one time and another, asked
his friend, Dr. Johnson, I can hardly recall another more searching
than one that he himself describes as whimsical.

"I know not how so whimsical a thought came into my head," says Boswell,
"but I asked, 'If, sir, you were shut up in a castle, and a new-born
child with you, what would you do?'

"JOHNSON: Why, sir, I should not much like my company.

"BOSWELL: But would you take the trouble of rearing it?

"He seemed, as may be supposed, unwilling to pursue the subject: but,
upon my persevering in my question, replied, 'Why, yes, sir, I would;
but I must have all conveniences. If I had no garden, I would make a
shed on the roof, and take it there for fresh air. I should feed it, and
wash it much, and with warm water, to please it, not with cold water, to
give it pain.'

"BOSWELL: But, sir, does not heat relax?

"JOHNSON: Sir, you are not to imagine the water is to be very hot. I
would not _coddle_ the child."

It appears, too, that the Doctor had given some thought to the subject,
although never expecting to be a mother himself: his immediate
insistence upon fresh air promises well for the infant, and the
frequency with which he proposes to wash his little companion indicates
that, so long as the water-supply of the castle lasted, he would have
done his part. A cow in the castle seems to have been taken for granted;
but, in 1769, even Dr. Johnson would have known little or nothing about
formulas, nor would it have occurred to him to make a pasteurizing
apparatus, as so many parents do nowadays, out of a large tin pail and a
pie-plate. Here the baby would have had to take his eighteenth-century
chance. And I wish, too, that he might have had a copy of "The Baby's
Physical Culture Guide," that modern compendium of twenty-four
exercises, by which a reasonably strongarmed mother may strengthen and
develop the infant's tiny muscles; for I like to think of Dr. Johnson
exercising his innocent companion in his shed on the roof. "Sir," he
says, "I do not much like my employment; but here we are, and we'll have
to make the best of it."

Such an experience, no doubt, would have been good for Dr. Johnson, and
good for the baby (if it survived). "That into which his little mind is
to develop," says "The Baby's Physical Culture Guide," "is plastic--like
a wax record, ready to retain such impressions as are made upon it"; and
on this wax some, at least, of the impressions left by Dr. Johnson must
have been valuable. But on the real mystery of babyhood--the insoluble
enigma that the "Guide" can only in small measure dispose of by
comparing the rearing of an infant with the home-manufacture of a record
for the gramaphone--the experience would have thrown no light.

The Doctor, I dare say, would have written a paper on the feeding and
washing of infants, and later dictionaries of familiar quotation might
perhaps have been enriched by the phrase,"'The baby is grandfather to
the man.'--JOHNSON." But of this grandfather the man has no memory. His
babyhood is a past concerning which he is perforce silent, a time when
it is only by the report of others that he knows he was living. His
little mind seems to have been more than a little blank; and although
gifted novelists have set themselves the imaginative task of thinking
and writing like babies, none, in my reading, has ever plausibly
succeeded. The best they can do is to think and write like little
adults. I recall, for example, the honest effort of Miss May Sinclair,
whom I greatly respect as an adult, to see Mr. Olivier through the eyes
of his baby daughter Mary. "Papa sat up, broad and tall above the table,
all by himself. He was dressed in black. One long brown beard hung down
in front of him and one short beard covered his mouth. You knew he was
smiling because his cheeks swelled high up in his face, so that his eyes
were squeezed into narrow, shining slits. When they came out again, you
saw scarlet specks and smears in their corners." A fearsome Papa!--and,
although I have no way of knowing that fathers do not present
themselves in this futurist aspect to their helpless offspring, I am
glad to think otherwise. At all events a baby is, and must be, well used
to living in Brobdingnag.

It would be a surprising thing, if it were not so common, that a man
shows so little curiosity about this forgotten period of his life. But
such curiosity would be impossible to satisfy. Existing photographs of
him at that time are a disappointment: he seldom admits seeing any
resemblance, and, if he does, the likeness rarely, if ever, gives him
any visible satisfaction. Nor can anything of real and personal interest
be found out by interviewing those who then knew him. Of a hundred, nay,
of a thousand or a million babies,--and though I cannot speak as a
woman, it seems to me (except, perhaps, for a livelier interest and
pleasure among them in their infant appearance) that everything I am
saying applies equally to babies of that fascinating sex,--the trivial
details observed by those who are nearest them are practically
identical. They thump their heads. They chew their fingers. They try to
feed their toes; and, sillier yet, they try to feed them with things
that are obviously inedible. And so forth. And so forth. If Dr. Johnson,
actually shut up in a castle, and a new-born child with him, had kept a
record, the result would have been very much like the records that
mothers now keep in what, unless I am mistaken, are called "Baby Books."
If you've seen one Baby Book, as the cynical old man said about
circuses, you've seen all of 'em.

Nor does any man take pleasure in preserving and reading over his own
Baby Book. Hercules, to be sure, might have been interested to read in
his mother's handwriting,--"_Tuesday._ An eventful day. Two big, horrid
Snakes came in from the garden, and got in Darling's cradle, frightening
Nurse into hysterics; but Darling only cooed and strangled them both
with his dear, strong little hands. He gets stronger and cunninger every
day. When the horrid Snakes were taken away from him, he cried and said,
'Atta! Atta!'"

But Hercules was an exceptionally interesting baby; and the average Baby
Book records nothing that a grown man can regard with pride, and much,
if he has any sensitiveness at all, that must make him blush. Nothing
but respect for his mother, it is almost safe to say, would withhold him
from hurrying the incriminating document to the cellar, and cremating it
in the furnace.

For in the beginning Captain William Kidd, George Washington, Dr.
Johnson, the writer of this essay, and even the editor of the "Atlantic
Monthly," looked and behaved very much alike. And so, for that matter,
did little Moll Cutpurse and little Susan B. Anthony. So far as anybody
could then have said, Captain Kidd might have become a thoughtful,
law-abiding essayist, and I a pirate, handicapped, indeed, by changed
conditions of maritime traffic, but unconscientiously doing my wicked
best.

As the twig is bent, says the proverb, so is the tree inclined; but
these little twigs are bent already, and I humbly submit, with all
respect to my scientific friends, and their white mice and their guinea
pigs, that where and how it happened remains an insoluble mystery.
Little as I know about myself, I know that I am neither a white mouse
nor a guinea pig. And this, mark you, is no mere conceit. Scientists
themselves have decided that when babies, in that remote past when they
first began really to interest their parents, and the human mother, the
most pathetic figure of that primitive world, first began the personal
and affectionate observation that was to develop slowly, over millions
of years, until it found expression in the first Baby Book--scientists,
themselves, I say, have decided that, then and there, you and I,
intelligent reader, began to differ essentially from every other known
kind of mammal. There appeared--oh, wonder!--something psychical as well
as physical about us; but _where it came from_, they cannot tell us.
"Natural selection," so John Fiske once summed up this opinion, "began
to follow a new path and make psychical changes instead of physical
changes." Little enough there seems to have been to start with; little
enough, indeed, there seems to be now--yet enough more to encourage us
to believe that Baby is a lot further along in the right direction than
he was a good many million years ago. And with this helpful conviction,
Baby himself, whether he will grow up to write essays or commit
picturesque murder, seems reasonably well satisfied. We solemn adults,
standing around the crib, may well admire, not so much the pinkness and
chubbiness of his toes, as the pinkness and chubbiness (if I may so
express it) of his simple satisfaction with the mere fact of existence,
his simple faith in the Universe. And when we think how impossible it is
to think of its beginning, we, too, may capture something of this
infantile optimism.

It is by no means impossible (though not susceptible of scientific
proof) that Baby may have a life of his own; and, if we may assume
Hercules weeping and saying, "Atta! Atta!"--because shrewd observers of
babyhood declare it to be characteristic of babies to say, "Atta! Atta!"
when something desirable, in this case two dead snakes, is removed from
their range of vision,--may we not assume also a universal language of
babies, and a place, such as it may be, from which they have emigrated?
Here, indeed, one follows M. Maeterlinck, except that, in his judgment,
unborn babies speak French. Such a theory is no help to the novelist,
for in that case baby Mary Olivier's impressions of Mr. Olivier must be
rendered in baby--a language equally unknown to Miss Sinclair and to her
readers. Babies have been heard to say, for example, "Nja njan dada atta
mama papai attai na-na-na hatta meen[)e]-meen[)e]-meen[)e] m[)o]mm
m[)o]mma ao-u"--and who but another baby knows whether this may not be
speech? The assumption that this is an effort to speak the language of
the baby's elders is academic, as, for that matter, is the assumption
that they are his elders. There may even be no baby at all; for, as
Schopenhauer has almost brusquely put it, "The uneasiness that keeps the
never-resting clock of metaphysics in motion, is the consciousness that
the non-existence of this world is just as possible as its existence."
But this, I confess, is far too deep for me.

    Baby, baby in your cot,
    Are you there?--or are you not?
    If you're not, then what of me!
    Baby, _what_ and _where_ are we?

For all practical purposes, however, Baby is sufficiently
real--substantial enough, indeed, as "The Baby's Physical Culture Guide"
shows in Exercise 24, to be lifted by his little feet and stood on his
little head; but, mercifully adds the "Guide," "do not hold Baby on his
head very long." For all practical purposes we must, and do, assume our
own existence. "Here we are," as I have imagined Dr. Johnson saying to
his innocent new-born comrade, "and we'll have to make the best of it."
Nobody has thought of a better way, or any other way at all, for us to
get here; and the familiar Biblical phrase, 'born again,' may perhaps be
more literal than we are wont to imagine, and apply to this world as
well as the next. Baby himself may just have been born again. That
innocent-seeming and rather silly-sounding monologue, which we flatter
ourselves is an earnest attempt to imitate our own speech,--"Nja njan
dada atta mama papai attai na-na-na hatta meen[)e]-meen[)e]-meene[)e]
m[)o]mm m[)o]mma ao-u,"--may it not be the soliloquy of a gentle
philosopher, or, again, the confession of an out-and-out rascal,
talking to himself of his misdeeds, chuckling and cooing over them,
indeed, before he forgets them in this new state of being? May not Papa,
waggishly shaking his forefinger and saying, "You little rascal, you,"
be speaking with a truthfulness which, if known, would make him sick?

Meanwhile, as says "The Baby's Physical Culture Guide," "Don't jerk Baby
round. Never rush through his exercises, but talk to him in a happy,
encouraging way. When he is able to talk he will be glad to tell you
what great, good fun he has been having."

So speaks, I think, a mother's imagination; in sober reality, even the
great good fun of Exercise 24 will be forgotten. Which is perhaps why,
although I have heard men wish they could again be children, I have
never heard any man say he would like to be a baby.




II

TO BE A BOY


_I love dearly to watch the boys at their play. How gayly they pitch and
catch their baseball with their strong little hands! How blithely they
run from base to base! How merrily their voices come to me across the
green; for, although I cannot hear what they say, I know it expresses a
young, innocent joy in this big, good world. Yet even in this Garden
there is a Serpent, and one day two of the little innocents quarreled
and came to blows. A real fight! I soon hurried out and stopped that,
but the sight of their little faces distorted with rage, and one poor
boy bleeding at the nose, upset me for quite a time._--AN OLD MAID'S
WINDOW.

       *       *       *       *       *

In "The Boyhood of Great Men," published by Harper and Brothers, in
1853, but now, I fear, very little read, it is told of Sir Isaac Newton
that "An accident first fired him to strive for distinction in the
school-room. The boy who was immediately above him in the class, after
treating him with a tyranny hard to bear, was cruel enough to kick him
in the stomach, with a severity that caused great pain. Newton resolved
to have his revenge, but of such a kind as was natural to his reasoning
mind, even at that immature age. He determined to excel his oppressor in
their studies and lessons; and, setting himself to the task with zeal
and diligence, he never halted in his course till he had found his way
to the top of the class; thus exhibiting and leaving a noble example to
others of his years similarly situated. Doubtless, after this, he would
heartily forgive his crestfallen persecutor, who could not but
henceforth feel ashamed of his unmanly conduct, while Newton would feel
the proud consciousness of having done his duty after the bravest and
noblest fashion which it is in the power of man to adopt."

We cannot all be Sir Isaac Newtons, and, although I may wish for a
passing moment that some sturdy little school-fellow had kicked me too
in the stomach, the resulting sequence of events would probably have
been different, and the world would have gained little or nothing by my
natural indignation. Having an impartial mind, I should like to know
also _why_ Sir Isaac was kicked in the stomach, and what became
afterward of the boy who kicked him. As his fame grew in the world, the
reflected glory of having thus kicked Sir Isaac Newton in the stomach
would presumably have brightened in proportion, but, lacking other
distinction, the kicker served his evolutionary purpose and has now
vanished.

But this much remains of him--that his little foot kicks also in the
stomach the widely accepted fallacy that boyhood is an age of unalloyed
gold, to which every man now and then looks back and vainly yearns to be
a boy again. "Oh! happy years!"--so sighed the poet Byron,--"once more,
who would not be a boy?" And so to-day, as one may at least deduce from
his general newspaper reading, sigh all the editors of all the
newspapers in the United States. Not, indeed, for a boyhood like Sir
Isaac Newton's, but for the standard American boyhood, to which, in
theory, every ageing American looks back with tender reminiscence--that
happy time when he went barefooted, played "hookey" from school, fished
in the running brook with a bent pin for a hook, and swam, with other
future bankers, merchants, clerks, clergymen, physicians and surgeons,
confidence-men, pickpockets, authors, actors, burglars, etc., etc., in
an old swimming-hole. The democracy of the old swimming-hole is, in
fact, the democracy of the United States, naked and unashamed; and even
in the midst of a wave of crime (one might almost imagine), if the
victim should say suddenly to the hold-up man,--

    "Oh, do you remember the ole swimmin' hole,
       And the hours we spent there together;
     Where the oak and the chestnut o'ershadowed the bowl,
       And tempered the hot summer weather?

     Ah, sweet were those hours together we spent
       In innocent laughter and joy!
     How little we knew at the time what it meant
       To be just a boy--just a boy!"

--the hold-up man would drop his automatic gun, and the two would
dissolve on each other's necks in a flood of sympathetic tears.

It is a pleasant and harmless fallacy, and I for one would not destroy
it; I am no such stickler for exactitude that I would take away from any
man whatever pleasure he may derive from thinking that he was once a
barefoot boy, even if circumstances were against him and his mother as
adamant in her refusal to let him go barefooted. But the fallacy is
indestructible: the symbols may not have been universal, but it is true
enough of boyhood that time then seems to be without limit; and this
comfortable, unthinking sense of immortality is what men have lost and
would fain recover. One forgets how cruelly slow moved the hands of the
school-room clock through the last, long, lingering, eternal fifteen
minutes of the daily life-sentence. One forgets how feverishly the
seconds chased each other, faster than human feet could follow, when
one's little self was late for school, and the clamor of the distant
bell ended in a solemn, ominous silence. Then was the opportunity for
stout heart to play "hookey," and to lure the finny tribe with a poor
worm impaled on a bent pin; and that, in the opinion of all the editors
of all the newspapers in the United States, is what all of us always
did. But in the painful reality most of us, I think, tried to overtake
those feverish seconds, seeking indeed to outrun time, and somehow or
other, though the bell had stopped ringing, get unostentatiously into
our little seats before it stopped. And so we ran, and ran, and ran,
lifting one leaden foot after the other with hopeless determination, in
a silent, nightmare world where the road was made of glue and the very
trees along the way turned their leaves to watch us drag slowly by.
Little respect we would have had then for the poet Byron and his "Ah!
happy years! once more, who would not be a boy?"

But even when time seemed to stand still, or go too fast, we had no
consciousness that the complicated clock of our individual existence
could ever run down and stop; and so happily careless were we of this
treasure, that we often wished to be men! "When I was young," says the
author of "The Boy's Week-Day Book,"--another volume that is not read
nowadays as much as it used to be,--

    I doubted not the time would come,
      When grown to man's estate,
    That I would be a noble 'squire,
      And live among the great.

    It was a proud, aspiring thought,
      That should have been exiled:--
    I wish I was more humble now
      Than when I was a child.

I wonder what proud, aspiring thought Uncle Jones, as he called himself,
just then had in mind; but it was evidently no wish to be a boy again:
perhaps he meditated matrimony.

For my own part I cannot successfully wish to be a boy; I remain
impervious to all the efforts of all the editors of all the newspapers
in the United States to dim my eye; and there must be many another eye
like mine, or else it is unbelievably unique. I lean back in my chair,
close my undimmed eye, and do my best; but, contrary to all editorial
expectation, I can summon no desire to go barefooted, fish with a bent
pin, or revisit the old swimming-hole

    Where the elm and the chestnut o'ershadowed the bowl,
      And tempered the hot summer weather.

I prefer a beach and a bathing-suit and somebody my own age. Yet do not
think, shocked reader, that I am unsympathetic with youth. I am more
sympathetic--that is all--with my contemporaries; and the thought
forces itself upon me that boyhood is a narrow and conventional period,
in which my own desire to go without shoes was exactly similar to my
mother's determination to wear a bustle. Equally anxious to follow the
fashion of our respective sets, neither understood the other; and I
would no more have worn a bustle than my mother would have gone
barefooted. My father, similarly thwarted in a single desire, would have
cared less: his wider interests--politics, business, family, the local
and world gossip that immersed him in his newspaper, art, literature,
music, and the drama, to say nothing of professional baseball and
pugilism (in which, however, many fathers and sons have a common
interest)--would have absorbed his disappointment.

But my narrower world, so to speak, was all feet. An unconventional
boy, as I think the most erudite student of boy-life and boy-psychology
will admit, is much more rare than an unconventional man; and even then
his unconventionality is likely to be imposed upon him "for his own
good" by well-meaning but tyrannical parents. "I have known boys," wrote
Uncle Jones, observing but not comprehending this characteristic fact,
"when playing at 'Hare and hounds' and 'Follow my leader,' to scramble
over hedges, leap over brooks, and mount up precipices, in a manner
which they would not have dared to attempt, had it not been for the
examples set them by their school-fellows; but," he adds, "I do not
remember any instance of a boy imitating another on account of his good
temper, patience, forbearance, principle, or piety."

Naturally not. You and I, Uncle Jones, might be expected to imitate
each other's good temper, patience, forbearance, principle, or
piety,--though I do not say that we would,--but from the point of view
of a boy these virtues are unconventional. Their practice shocks and
disconcerts the observer. The behavior of Sir Isaac Newton, when kicked
in the stomach, was perfectly scandalous.

And what is there, after all, in the life of a boy, that a man would
find interesting? Or that he may not do, if such is sufficiently his
desire to "make" the time for it, as he makes time for his adult
pleasures, and if he is not too old or too fat? He can spend his
vacation at the old swimming-hole--but he never does it. He can go
barefooted whenever he wishes: his mother can no longer prevent him. He
can fish with a bent pin in the porcelain bathtub,--adding a goldfish
to make the pursuit more exciting,--every morning before he takes his
bath. He can chase butterflies; here and there, indeed, a man makes a
profession of it, and institutions of learning call him an entomologist,
and pay him much honor and a small salary. Nobody forbids him to enlarge
his mental horizon by reading the lives of criminals and detectives; and
I can myself direct him to many an entertaining book, which is at once
far worse and far better, morally and artistically, than the sober
narratives that Old Sleuth used to write by the yard for boys to read by
stealth. He can roll a hoop; in many cases it would do him a world of
good to roll it down to the office in the morning and back home at
night. If he can persuade other ageing men, wishful of renewed boyhood,
to join with him, he can play at marbles, tick, puss-in-the-corner,
hop-scotch, ring-taw, and "Hot beans ready buttered." (Uncle Jones
mentions these games. I do not remember all of them myself, but "Hot
beans ready buttered" sounds especially interesting.) And where better
than in some green, quiet corner at the Country Club? And why, if you
_will_ raise the question of conventionality, why more foolish than
golf, or folk-dancing?

But what he cannot do is to assume the boy's unconsciousness of his own
mortality. What he cannot unload is his own consciousness of
responsibility to and for others. Life, in short, has provided the man
with a worrying company of creditors of whom the boy knows
nothing--Creditor Cost-of-Living, Creditor Ambition, Creditor
Conscience, and Creditor Death. And the boy is unmarried! It is even
claimed by one philosopher of my acquaintance that this is why men wish
they were once more boys. I grant the plausibility of this opinion; for
the more a man is is devoted to his wife and family, the more he is
beset and worried by these troublesome creditors, the more, one may
reasonably argue, he feels the need of time to meet his obligations, and
is likely now and then to envy the boy his narrow, conventional, but
immortal-feeling life.

Uncle Jones misses, I think, this fundamental fact. He is always trying
to destroy the boy's sense of immortality in this world by trying to
persuade him to read the Bible and prepare for immortality in the next.
"When a boy first begins his A B C," says Uncle Jones, "it is terrible
work for him for a short time; yet how soon he gets over it, and begins
to read! And, then, what a pleasure to be able to read a good and
pleasant book! Oh, it is worthwhile to go through the trouble of
learning to read fifty times over, to obtain the advantage of reading
the Bible."




III

ON MEETING THE BELOVED

     _Now it is a quainte Oddity of thys State and Mysterie of Loue that
     youre trew Louer combines the opposyte qualities of a deepe
     Humilitie and a loftie Conceit of Hymselfe. For with respect to
     this, hys Mistresse, he believes himself a most inferior Person,
     and as it were a mere Worme; yet if he doth suspect her to regard
     any Man els as his Equal, he is consumed with great Astonishment
     and raging Indignation, for this same Loue is a great Destroyer of
     Common Sense in its Victimes. For he thinketh Hymselfe inferior to
     her because he is her Louer, and superior to all Men els for the
     same silly Reason._--ANATOMIE OF LOUE.


To any sensitive man, not yet armored by the indifference that comes of
being married himself, there is cause for apprehension in the prospect
of meeting for the first time that person, male or female, whom somebody
he knows and loves has recently agreed to marry. The event, when it
comes, is unavoidable, nor is there any period in adult life when it may
not happen, or anybody we know so old that he or she may not occasion
it. Fact is more romantic, or at any rate remains romantic much later in
life, than fiction. Only the other day I read in the newspaper of a man
of one hundred and thirty-five years who had just subjected his little
circle to this formality. Very likely the newspaper exaggerated, but the
case undermines the security that one ordinarily feels in his
relationship with the ageing.

Now it needs no argument that to be happy in the happiness of others is
an inexpensive pleasure and well worth cultivating. Other things being
equal, one should go dancing and singing to his first meeting with
another's beloved. Bright-colored flowers, be she sixteen or sixty,
should blossom, to his imagination, from the granite curb along his way;
and, though a foolish convention may repress the song and dance, yet
should he walk as if shod with the most levitating heels ever made from
the liveliest of live rubber, and sing merrily in his heart.

But, thus to enter into the happiness of another, one must see and feel,
as if for himself, some good and sufficient reason for that happiness;
and the deep, insoluble mystery essential to all proper betrothals is
that this good and sufficient reason is not necessarily visible: these
two are happy-mad, and how shall anybody who is sane enter into their
lunacy?

Mr. Harvey Todd, 2d,--to take the first name that comes to mind,--has
become engaged to Miss Margaret Lemon; Miss Lemon to Mr. Todd. Well and
good. Nature, which, for some reason that mankind has long curiously and
vainly sought to penetrate, wishes to continue the human race, is, one
may believe, reasonably well satisfied. It is one job among many. But
the satisfaction of Mr. Todd and Miss Lemon, if it could be put to such
haberdashery use, would girdle the Equator, and the ends, tied in a true
lover's knot, would flutter beyond the farthest visible star. Men and
women have become engaged in the past; men and women will become engaged
in the future; but this engagement of Harvey Todd and Margaret Lemon is
and will ever remain unique--and so whoever is now called upon to
appraise one party to this wonder and congratulate the other, may well
be troubled. He is not so much afraid of what he may do and say,--for
any man may hope to achieve a hard, quick, almost sobbing pressure of
the hand and a few muttered words,--as of the way, in spite of himself,
that he will look when he does and says it; there, indeed, the amateur
actor profits by his hobby. There is, to be sure, the saving chance that
Miss Lemon (or Mr. Todd) may so pleasurably affect him that the ordeal
will be less difficult than he anticipates: there is even the rare
chance that he may _instantly and completely agree with Mr. Todd's
estimate of Miss Lemon_; but this is the happy-madness itself, and
certainly not desirable under the circumstances. There is the
possibility, even more rare and less desirable, that Miss Lemon, seeing
him for the first time, _will instantly and completely prefer him to
Mr. Todd_. There is the possibility that he may recoil with horror from
Miss Lemon (or Mr. Todd), or be recoiled from, or that both may recoil
simultaneously, falling over, figuratively, on their backs, and being
picked up and carried away unconscious, and in opposite directions, by
surprised onlookers. His whole nature may, in short, instinctively run
toward, or away from, the beloved; and between these extremes lies a
gamut of intermediary emotions, which at the moment he would hardly wish
to uncover. This stiff and geometrical smile, he asks himself at the
worst, can it deceive anybody? this hypocritical mutter of
congratulation, does it proceed from his own or an ice chest? Nor is he
much relieved when Mr. Todd or Miss Lemon, as the case may be, proves
how genuine appeared his smile, how sincere his mutter, by asking him
in affectionate detail what he thinks of the other--a procedure which
should be legally forbidden the newly engaged, under penalty of being
refused a marriage license for at least ten years.

This state of mind in lovers, so important to those who are called upon
to meet the beloved for the first time, has engaged the attention of
essayists, conversationalists, and philosophers. "They fall at once,"
wrote Stevenson, "into that state in which another person becomes to us
the very gist and centre point of God's creation, and demolishes our
laborious theories with a smile; in which our ideas are so bound up with
the one master-thought, that even the trivial cares of our own person
become so many acts of devotion, and the love of life itself is
translated into a wish to remain in the same world with so precious and
desirable a fellow creature. And all the while their acquaintances look
on in stupor."

"No, sir," said Dr. Johnson, promptly improving Mr. Boswell's milder
assertion that love is like being enlivened with champagne, "No, sir.
Admiration and love are like being intoxicated with champagne"--an
opinion, one hopes, that will not some day be made the basis of a
nation-wide campaign to prohibit falling in love.

"His friends," said Ralph Waldo Emerson, "find in her a likeness to her
mother, or her sisters, or to persons not of her blood. The lover sees
no resemblance except to summer evenings and diamond mornings, to
rainbows and the song of birds."

Mr. Todd and Miss Lemon (so like a rainbow) are impervious to any lack
of enthusiasm that you or I, dear, unselfish, sensitive reader, may fear
to exhibit when either leads us the other by the hand and says, "This
is IT." Ours, if any, will be the suffering. It may even happen that
Miss Lemon or Mr. Todd--Mr. Todd or Miss Lemon beaming consent and
approval--will suggest that _we call her_ (_or him_) _Margaret_ (_or
Harvey_).

Yet from another point of view, but this is a selfish one, apprehension
is justified in proportion to the sensitive man's previous intimacy with
the individual whose beloved he is about to meet. For until that meeting
is over, "previous" is the word for it: whatever opinion the beloved may
form of him will determine the degree and manner of its continuance. If
Miss Lemon disapproves of him, though Mr. Todd has hitherto loved him as
Damon did Pythias, all is over; if Mr. Todd disapproves of him, though
he has known Miss Lemon from her perambulator, all is over. A pale
ghost, he may, in either case, sometimes hang his spectral hat in the
Todd hallway, and even extend his phantom legs under the Todd mahogany;
but ALL IS OVER. Divinely harmonious as they seem, these two will never
agree to let him try, however humbly and conscientiously, to cultivate
the inexpensive pleasure of being happy in their happiness. He becomes
what no self-respecting man can wish to be--a fly in the ointment. Most
cases, fortunately, are not so serious: he will be given a reasonable
chance to make a place for himself on this new plane to which Mr. Todd
and Miss Lemon have been translated; but it is always a question whether
he can enter that plane himself, or must hereafter be content with
hearing from his former friend through a medium. For he has not, as is
so often gracefully but emptily said on these trying occasions, been
enriched by the acquisition of a new friend: he has simply exchanged
Miss Lemon or Mr. Todd (as the case may be) for a composite, a Toddlemon
or a Lemontodd--a few years will show which. He must make the best he
can of that composite. He who was formerly described as (let us say) "my
friend, Mr. Popp," becomes, if he becomes at all, "our friend, Mr.
Popp"; and if ever he hears himself being introduced as "Mr. Todd's
friend, Mr. Popp," or as "Mrs. Todd's friend, Mr. Popp," he had better
go away as soon as politeness permits, and never come back. Never.

I speak, of course, in generalities; for there are no rules immutably
governing all cases, and life is mellowed and beautified by shining,
sensible examples, in which Mr. Todd and Miss Lemon become one, yet
realize that in many respects, being human, they must still remain two;
then, indeed, the congratulator may actually be enriched by the
acquisition of a new friend--but not instantly, as one is enriched by
the acquisition of a new hat. Yet it is always the wiser part, in
preparing to meet a beloved, to prepare for the worst.

These are evidently the apprehensions of a bachelor, sensitive but not
unselfish; the mental attitude is different with a student, philosopher,
and idealist who, thinking not of himself, contemplates another's
marriage in the calm, intelligent way, having as yet no beloved in which
he can contemplate his own. Such a one weighs. Such a one is conscious
that, little as _he_ knows the beloved of Mr. Todd or Miss Lemon, there
is grave danger that Mr. Todd knows Miss Lemon, or Miss Lemon Mr. Todd,
hardly better. This happy-madness may not only be a delusion, as a calm
outside intelligence contemplates it, but it may be a snare. Mistakes do
happen. There are known cases in which the happy lunatic has been
mistaken in a beloved not once but often; and the persistent effort of
these poor madmen and madwomen to correct one mistake by making another
is one of the most discussed and pitiable phases of our civilization.
The calm intelligence must balance also the practical aspects of the
business, its risks and liabilities as well as its profits; and so
serious is the enterprise when thus examined that he can hardly fail to
be terrified for anybody he knows and loves who is undertaking it.

O Harvey! Harvey! (or Margaret! Margaret!)

Tact is what he will pray for. And if his prayer is granted, when Mr.
Todd (or Miss Lemon) asks him, "Now, honestly, what do you think of her
(or him)?" he will say, "Of course I do not know Miss Lemon (or Mr.
Todd) very well _yet_, but I have never met anybody whom I _hoped_ to
know and like better." Which will be quite true, and please the
twittering questioner much more than if he said, "Oh, I don't know. I
_don't_ know."




IV

THIS IS A FATHER

    _Proud Parent, in this little life
      Yourself reflected see,
    And think how Baby will progress
      A man like you to be!

    So stout, so strong, so wise, and when
      Sufficient years have flown,
    Like you the happy parent of
      A baby of his own!

    And when that unborn baby grows
      To be a man like you,
    Oh, think how proud that man will be
      To be a parent too.

    So think, when life oppresses you
      And you are feeling sad,
    A million, million, million times
      You'll be a happy dad._

    --THE FATHER'S ANTHEM.


In the life of man fatherhood is so likely to happen, that I wonder
Shakespeare did not select father as a natural, and indeed inevitable,
successor to lover in his well-known seven ages. He chose the soldier,
"full of strange oaths, and bearded like the pard," presumably because
such soldiers were common in Elizabethan London. But fathers must have
been more so: they must have gone in droves past the tavern window where
Shakespeare (as what we now call the "wets" so like to think) sat at his
ale-stained table, dipping now his quill in an inkwell, and again his
nose in a tankard; but they seem to have made no impression. Indeed this
unromantic, necessary figure, composite as it is of all sorts and
conditions of men, has never appealed strongly to the poets; perhaps it
is their revenge because fathers so seldom read poetry.

Whatever else a man does, whether he lives by banking or burglary,
ascends to the presidency or descends to the gutter, he is likely to be
a father: they are as countless as the pebbles on a beach or the leaves
in Vallombrosa, and the few who evade paternity evade also the purpose
for which nature evidently created them, and go through life thumbing
their noses, so to speak, at Divine Providence. So taken for granted is
this vocation of fatherhood, and so little considered in comparison with
other masculine employments, that no correspondence school offers a
course, and many a young man undertakes to raise children with less
hesitation than he would start in to raise chickens. Some accept
fatherhood with joy, others with resignation, like a recently wedded
young Italian who cobbles my shoes, and spoke the other day of his own
new little one. "Zee fadder and zee modder," he said, "zey work and zey
slave for zee leetle one. But what-a good? When he is grow up, he say,
'To hell wiz zee fadder and zee modder!'" And so, as Shakespeare may
have decided, there is no universal type of fatherhood, nor has the
imagination of mankind created one, as in the case of mothers, for
convenient literary and conversational use. The lines of the
balladist,--

    With his baby on his knee
    He's as happy as can be,--

were, to be sure, something in this direction; but they have become so
wholly associated with humor, that even the late Mr. Rogers, had he
known the ballad, could hardly have found inspiration therein for a
group; nor Shakespeare adapted the lines to describe seriously one of
his seven ages. He might have scribbled experimentally,--

              Then the father,
    Infant on knee, and happy like the clam,--

but that would have been the end of it. He would have crossed out the
experiment, and taken another drink.

Father, in fact, follows Mother, in the mind of the general, so far
behind that he is almost invisible, a tiny object on red wheels at the
end of a string. But the little fellow carries a pocketbook: when Mother
needs money she pulls in the string, and he comes up in a hurry. And, as
is usually the case with popular conceptions, this odd, erroneous
notion, which most fathers seem cheerfully enough to accept, has no
doubt its historic foundation, and derives from the unquestionable
supremacy of Mother in the beginning. At that period, indeed, it is
hardly to be expected that any father should feel immediately _en
rapport_ with his new-born child, or become intimately associated with
its helpless, flower-like life. Ever since the idea, which has now so
long lost its original element of bewildering surprise, yet remains
always somewhat surprising, first dawned upon a human father and mother
that _this baby_ belonged to _them_, conditions have inexorably
consigned the infant to the care of its mother, while its father pursued
elsewhere the equally necessary business of providing sustenance for the
family. A division of labor was imperative: somebody must stay at home
in the cave and tend the baby, somebody must go out in the woods and
hustle for provisions. Maternity was, as it must have been, already a
feminine habit, but paternity was something new and unexpected; and
although I suspect, in many cases, this astonishing discovery was
followed by speedy flight. Trueheart the First took up his
responsibilities and his stone axe together.

The horror is recorded with which Dr. Johnson regarded the idea of being
left alone in a castle with a new-born child; and this feeling in so
civilized a man was no doubt an echo of the emotion with which poor,
bewildered, primitive, but faithful Trueheart would have envisaged being
left alone in the cave with his new-born baby: the sense of relief, of
gayety, of something definite and within his capabilities to do, with
which the young father nowadays takes his hat and starts for the office,
must be much the same as that with which Trueheart took his stone axe
and started for the woods.

Thus, in the very inception of the human family, fatherhood became
subordinate to motherhood; and so, because conditions after all have not
fundamentally changed, it has ever since continued. "Mothers' Day," for
example, is celebrated with enthusiasm; "Fathers' Day" remains a mere
humorous suggestion, a kind of clown in the editorial circus. Then as
now, moreover, in the earlier life of the child, Father, although not
quite as useless as a vermiform appendix, was and is of very little
importance.

I am not forgetting--for I do them an honor I can hardly express--those
fathers who walk, all through the night, back and forth, back and forth,
back and forth, across an otherwise silent room, that the motion
incidental to their perambulation may soothe a mysteriously afflicted
babe to sleep; nor am I unaware that Father sometimes pushes baby's
wicker chariot, pausing ever and anon to pick up and restore some
article of infant use or pleasure that the little rascal has
mischievously thrown overboard, and in many other touching ways
patiently tries to make himself useful. These offices are almost
impersonal. Any father could perform them for any baby: a mechanical
father, ingeniously contrived to walk back and forth, push, or pick up
and restore, according as the operator wound him up and pressed the
proper button, would do as well. Only in proportion as the child begins
to sit up and take intelligent notice does Father's position become
responsible, important, and precarious. From that time on, his behavior
has consequences.

Fatherhood, in fact, is a mighty serious business--yet even to-day many
a father seems to have made no more conscious preparation for it than
had our astonished ancestor, Trueheart. My friend Mr. Todd, for example,
meets Miss Margaret Lemon at an afternoon tea. A blind attachment (I am
putting the case with unimpassioned simplicity, for this is no novel)
springs up (God knows why) between them. If Harvey Todd had been Faust,
Mephistopheles would have wasted time trying to tempt him with any
Margaret but a Lemon; and if Miss Lemon had been that other Margaret,
Mephistopheles would have had to produce Harvey Todd, who, I am glad to
believe, would have promptly told him to go to the Devil.

And so Mr. Todd becomes engaged; and after a decent interval, he becomes
a husband; and after another decent interval he becomes a father--and
who more surprised than he! Even as we congratulate him, clinking
together the long-handled spoons that come in the ice-cream sodas with
which all good fellows now celebrate such an occasion, it is perfectly
evident that Harvey Todd has given hardly more thought to the
tremendously important and interesting relation of father and son than
might reasonably have been expected of little Harvey, Jr. Mind you, I do
not attempt to say how he shall conduct himself: that is his business;
but as he begins, so is he likely to go on to the end of the chapter,
when little Harvey is no longer a roly-poly human plaything but a great
big man like himself. And according as he _has_ conducted himself, that
great big man will bless him or curse him or regard him with varying
degrees of affection or contumely. If he has never thought of it before,
it is something for him to think about now, seriously, in the brief
respite while his duties are perambulatory, and a mechanical father,
cleaned, oiled, and wound up once a day, would do just as well. Fill the
glasses again, O white-coated Dispenser, and make mine chocolate. For
this man is a father! He has created new life, or clothed in mortality
an immortal spirit (though he doesn't know which), and here he
stands,--I said chocolate,--and Solomon, with all his wisdom and all his
experience, could not tell him what to do about it.

So we clink our long-handled spoons.

For in sober truth, as one reads the reputed wisdom of Solomon on this
topic, fatherhood seems to be in a state of evolution and to have
advanced materially since he was a father. "He that spareth his rod,"
said Solomon in the complacent, dogmatic way that seems to have charmed
the Queen of Sheba more than it would charm me, "hateth his son: But he
that loveth him, chasteneth him betimes." And again, "The rod and the
reproof giveth wisdom." We know better nowadays: the rod has become a
figure of speech, the occasions that even appear to excuse its use are
fewer and fewer, and when they happen, the modern practice may be
described quite simply as a laying-on of the hand. Here, however, is
something objective for a father to do--an occasion when Mother pulls in
the string, and Father, mercifully hanging back on his red wheels, comes
up in a hurry, and what has to be done is done. But the procedure, over
the centuries, has compelled thought; the idea has ripened slowly in the
paternal mind that it is an unwise waste of strength and emotion to
attempt at one end what may be better accomplished at the other; and in
this revolutionary discovery there must have been pioneers whose success
as fathers was measured by the affection and respect of worthy sons.
Hamlet's father, I believe, rarely, if ever, spanked young Hamlet, and
never in such mood and manner as to make the little Prince of Denmark
smart at the injustice of the high-handed proceeding. Mr. Todd can do no
better than follow the elder Hamlet's example; and in so doing he will
show himself wiser than Solomon, with his old-fashioned insistence on
proverbs and a stout stick. "He that, being often reproved, hardeneth
his neck," said Solomon (and here perhaps is the origin of the phrase to
"get it in the neck"), "shall suddenly be broken, and that beyond
remedy"; which is an attitude of mind that the best thought certainly no
longer considers conducive to the best fatherly results. The book for
Mr. Todd to read is not Solomon's Book of Proverbs but Theodore
Roosevelt's Letters to his Children.

If Solomon had been right, fatherhood would be easy; but the simple fact
that even you or I, gentle Reader, being often reproved, will harden
our necks, reveals the widespread tendency to ossification that has
gradually discredited the didactic and strong-arm system. If I may
compose a proverb myself--

    The wise man maketh no enemy of his neighbor;
    And the wise father maketh a friend of his son.

But it is easier to compose a proverb than to apply it, and friendship,
which can be built only on a good foundation of common understanding and
truthful speech, is here especially difficult. "To speak truth," says
Stevenson, "there must be a moral equality or else no respect; and hence
between parent and child intercourse is apt to degenerate into a verbal
fencing bout, and misapprehensions to become ingrained. And there is
another side to this; for the parent begins with an imperfect notion of
the child's character, formed in early years or during the equinoctial
gales of youth; to this he adheres, noting only the facts that suit with
his preconceptions; and wherever a person fancies himself unjustly
judged, he at once and finally gives up the effort to speak truth."

Somehow or other our Mr. Todd, if he wishes to make the best of his
paternity, must overcome the handicap imposed by his wider mental
experience and his acquired moral distinctions between rightness and
wrongness; somehow or other he must create in Harvey, Jr., an
affectionate regard for his jolly old father that shall make it a line
of least resistance for the little fellow to follow and imitate his
jolly old father's opinions and wishes. Often, indeed, if he is wise,
Mr. Todd will dare to seem foolish. "Foolishness," said Solomon, "is
bound up in the heart of the child"--and there he stopped, after adding
his usual suggestion about the rod as a remedy. But it is bound up also,
O Solomon, in every heart that beats, and is one thing at least that Mr.
Todd and little Harvey have in common to start with.

And so the father plays his unapplauded part--"tragedy, comedy, history,
pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,
tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or poem
unlimited," as Polonius might enumerate. He wants no applause. He wants
no "Father's Day." He wants no statue. He wants no advice. Yet it seems
to me that a figure and character has lately been perpetuated in
statuary of various kinds that answers all practical purposes, though
most of us think of the original as a Great American rather than as a
Great Father.




V

ON BEING A LANDLORD

     _In an informal, but practical way, a landlord is, and must be, a
     Justice of the Domestic Peace. If one tenant murders another
     tenant, the case passes beyond his jurisdiction: he has no power of
     the black cap. But if one tenant annoys another (which may
     eventually lead to homicide more or less justifiable), the case
     comes to his court: he is both jury and judge, and can in extremity
     pronounce sentence of eviction. But so many and subtile are the
     ways in which tenants annoy each other that to be a perfectly just
     landlord would demand a wisdom greater than Solomon's._--APARTMENTS
     TO LET.


On my consciousness are impressed the names of fourteen married women
and one (so far as I know) unmarried man: Mrs. Murphy, Mrs. Smith, Mrs.
Brown, Mrs. Cawkins, Mrs. Trolley, Mrs. Karsen, Mrs. Le Maire, Mrs.
Barber, Mrs. Sibley, Mrs. Carrot, Mrs. Mahoney, Mrs. Hopp, Mrs. Ranee,
Mrs. Button, and Charlie Wah Loo. Their husbands I hardly know at all;
indeed, if Mrs. Carrot should introduce Mr. Hopp to me by that dear
title,--as, for example, 'my husband, Mr. Hopp,'--I should hastily
readjust my ideas and decide that Mrs. Carrot was really Mrs. Hopp, and
Mrs. Hopp really Mrs. Carrot. Charlie Wah Loo _may_ be married; he
devotes his days to the washtub and ironing-board, and his nights (I
like to think) to what Mr. Sax Rohmer, author of "The Yellow Claw,"
mysteriously mentions as "ancient, unnamable evils." In feudal times,
however, I should have known them all better. Tramp! Tramp! Tramp! that
brave little company--

  BUTTON
  HOPP
  CARROT
  BARBER
  KARSEN
  CAWKINS
  SMITH
  RANEE
  MAHONEY
  SIBLEY
  LE MAIRE
  TROLLEY
  BROWN
  MURPHY

--would have marched sturdily under my banner, each in his stout
leathern jerkin, manfully carrying his trusty pike, halberd, long bow,
short bow, or arbalest; and with them Charlie Wah Loo would have trotted
along by himself as an interesting human curiosity--or, perhaps, in a
cage. Each in his time would have done me fealty, saying, "Know ye this,
my lord, that I will be faithful and true unto you, and faith to you
will bear for the tenements which I claim to hold of you; and that I
will lawfully do to you the customs and services which I ought to do at
the terms assigned. So help me God and his saints."

Those, in retrospect, were pleasant days for the landlord, when rent was
paid in loyal service and a few dozen eggs, or what not. But all that
now remains of the ancient custom is that they continue, vicariously,
through the agency of their beloved helpmates, to pay me rent. In this
sense, Charlie Wah Loo, with his washtub and irons, is his own beloved
helpmate.

Briefly, I am a landlord. But do not hate me, gentle reader, for I am of
that mild, reticent, and reluctant kind to whom even collecting the
rent, to say nothing of raising it, is more a pain than a pleasure.
There are such landlords, products of evolution, inheritance, and a
civilization necessarily based on barter. Our anxious desire is to exact
no more than a "fair rent"; at our weakest, when a tenant gets in
arrears and, evidently enough, cannot catch up, our line of least
resistance would be to go quietly away and leave that tenement to the
tenant, his heirs and assigns forever. It is unpleasant, and becomes
more so every time, to remind him that he owes us money. Only the
inexorable harshness of our own overlords compels us, hating ourselves
the while, to be strict.

I have seen it stated as a scientific deduction that "in the beginning
man probably dwelt in trees after the fashion of his ape-like ancestors.
He lived on nuts, fruits, roots, wild honey, and perhaps even bird's
eggs, grubs from rotten wood, and insects." And my own experience leads
me to feel that there was much to be said for this way of life, though I
draw the line at birds' eggs, grubs from rotten wood, and insects, at
which items of an earlier menu even the scientific mind seems to baulk.
But it may well have happened that some strong fellow presently got
possession of an especially desirable tree, and allowed others to share
its branches only if they kept him supplied with provisions. Thus may
landlordry have been established.

Millions of years have passed since then,--a mere flicker in the great
movie of eternity,--and we are still, many of us, living in trees; but
the trees have been cut down and made into houses, of which at present
there are not enough to go round. We have outgrown our simple arboreal
diet, developed and perfected the hen (no small achievement in itself),
invented underwear, and in countless other cunning ways have created a
complex civilization. Century by century, generation by generation, we
have acquired tastes and conventions that prevent us from returning to
the simple, happy, uncomplicated life of our ape-like ancestors. And in
this civilization that we have made, the figure of the landlord bulks
large and overshadowing, and might, indeed, be likened to Rodin's
Thinker, thinking, in this instance, about how much more he shall raise
the rent. One must assume, of course, that he is thinking about it just
before taking his morning bath.

It is not my purpose to dwell upon those disgraceful landlords who
profiteer. I am concerned rather with the character of the Perfect
Landlord, a just man, respected, if not loved (within reason), by
fourteen married women and a Charlie Wah Loo. But this admirable ideal
seems impracticable. I know a landlord who speaks with pleasure of the
social aspect of collecting his rents; but his is a selected tenantry,
for he lets apartments only to what he calls "nice people," whose
society he feels reasonably certain he will enjoy on rent-day, and whose
financial status, he also feels reasonably certain, is and will remain
such that no painful embarrassment on this sordid but necessary side of
their relations will ever cast a gloom over his visit. Yet even so, I
gather that there are sometimes breaks in the golden chain, when the
nice tenant chats with a too feverish interest about life and things in
general, and the sordid aspect cannot be glossed over by a casual "Ah,
yes, the rent." Such breaks in the golden chain are the test of
landlordry.

I am reminded of a little one-act play which I have just written
entitled

     THE RENT

     CHARACTERS: MRS. BUTTON, a tenant.

     I, a landlord.

     SCENE: _A tenement, owned by_ I, _but referred to as_ MRS.
     BUTTON'S, _which is perhaps more correct._ MRS. BUTTON _is washing
     dishes. The room steams. Slow creaks outside as of a reluctant man
     coming upstairs._ MRS. BUTTON _smiles enigmatically. A knocking at
     the door, as in "Macbeth."_

     MRS. BUTTON. Come in. (I _enters._)

     I _(laughing with affected lightness)._ Ah, _good-_morning, Mrs.
     Button. I've come for the rent.

     MRS. BUTTON _(weeping)._ It's not me, as ye know, sir, that likes
     to be behind with th' rint. I'm proud.

     I _(touched in spite of himself by the sight of a strong woman in
     tears)._ I know _that._ But you've been here seven months, Mrs.
     Button, without--

     MRS. BUTTON _(wiping her eyes)._ Yis, I'm an old tenant, and 't
     would break me heart to go. An' me goin' to begin payin' reg'lar
     only nixt week, sir. It's th' only home I've got, an' it's cruel
     harrd to leave it.

     I (_sternly_). Very well. Very well. I shall _expect_ the money
     next week. Good-day, Mrs. Button.

     MRS. BUTTON. Good-day, sir.

     I _exits_. MRS. BUTTON _resumes washing dishes, smiling
     enigmatically. The room steams, and steps are heard going hastily
     downstairs, fainter and fainter_.

     (CURTAIN)

It is a grave responsibility--this power to dispossess other human
beings of their little home--to say nothing of the recurrent task of
making them behave themselves in it. Perhaps, on some other and happier
plane of being, all landlords will be just and all tenants reasonable of
disposition and stable of income. Then, indeed, the landlord need have
nothing in common with a well-known walrus, of whom it is told that, in
dealing with certain oysters, "with sobs and tears he sorted out those
of the largest size." But something might even now be done by compulsory
psychopathic--I had nearly said psychopathetic--treatment; for thus the
effort to solve the rent problem would go to the soil in which it is
rooted, and no complicated laws would be needed. Landlords and tenants,
in fact everybody, would have to take the treatment,--including, of
course, the psychopathic practitioners, who would treat each other,--but
it would be a fine thing for the world if it worked.

One sees in imagination the profiteering landlord, after looking long
and intently at a bright object, say a five-dollar gold-piece, dropping
peacefully asleep; one hears the voice of the scientist repeating,
firmly and monotonously, "When you wake up you will never want anything
more than a just rent--a just rent--a just rent--a just rent."

One sees this profiteering landlord, once more wide awake, busy at his
desk with pencil and paper, scowling conscientiously as he endeavors to
figure out exactly what a just rent will be. Investment, so much; taxes;
insurance; repairs; laths and plaster here, wall-paper there; water,
light, putty, paint, janitor, Policeman's Annual Ball, postman at
Christmas, wear and tear on landlord's shoes, etc., etc., etc.,
etc.--now, if ever, there is a tired business man.

Or,--to take another aspect of this great reform,--there is the sad case
of Mrs. Murphy, who can no longer endure the children of Mrs. Trolley,
who lives in the flat above her. They run and play, run and play; they
produce in Mrs. Murphy a conviction that presently the floor will give
way, and the children, still running and playing, will come right
through on her poor head. Yet it is the nature of children to run and
play, run and play: the landlord cannot, try as he may, persuade Mrs.
Trolley to chain her offspring. So away, away to the Public Psychopathic
Ward with poor Mrs. Murphy. "Madam, when you awake, the sound of running
feet over your poor head will suggest the joys of innocent childhood,
and you will be very happy when they run and play, run and play--happy
all day--run and play--run and play--happy all day--run and play."

But alas, so far even psychopathic treatment cannot promise to stabilize
incomes. There must still be times when the just landlord must say to
his tenant, "All is over between us; we must part forever--and at once."
To which, judging by the tenor of some of the laws that have lately
been suggested, the tenant may presently answer, "All right, you Old
Devil. This is the tenth of the month, and I'll shake the dust of your
disgraceful premises off my feet two years and six months from
to-morrow."

It's a puzzling time for us landlords. Not long ago I felt compelled to
raise the rent of fourteen married women and one (so far as I know)
unmarried Chinaman. And then, overcome by conscience, I sat down and
figured out a just rent. And when I had finished I came upon a
distressing discovery. I had raised the rent of neither Mrs. Murphy,
Mrs. Smith, Mrs. Brown, Mrs. Cawkins, Mrs. Trolley, Mrs. Karsen, Mrs. Le
Maire, Mrs. Barber, Mrs. Sibley, Mrs. Carrot, Mrs. Mahoney, Mrs. Hopp,
Mrs. Ranee, Mrs. Button, nor Charlie Wah Loo, anything like enough.




VI

OLD FLIES AND OLD MEN


_To-day, my dear, I greatly astonished my grandson by standing on my
head, and by entering the kitchen by turning a back-somersault through
the door--exercises which I frequently practise for the benefit of my
digestion, but not often in public. His bewilderment at seeing a man of
my years perform such acrobatics was most comical. But there, there, one
must amuse one's self with the young sometimes. I have thought more or
less seriously of advising these exercises for general use; but few men
have had the advantage of being brought up in a circus, and what seems
easy to me would no doubt present insuperable obstacles to most. The
main thing, after all, is not to grow old before your time, because the
silly younger generation likes to flatter itself by thinking you
antediluvian._--LETTERS OF FATHER WILLIAM.

Few men read Shakespeare, and so, fortunately enough, few think of
themselves as being some day a pantaloon--lean and slippered (as
Shakespeare described this sixth age of man), with spectacles on nose,
his youthful hose, well-saved, a world too wide for his shrunk shank,
and his big, manly voice, turning again to childish treble, operating
like a penny whistle when he tries to converse. But the Bard made a
bogey: at any rate, there are fewer pantaloons visible than there
probably were in Elizabethan England; and the sixth age of man appears
more logically to offer a kind of Indian summer that is well worth
living for. Shakespeare, it seems to me, slipped a cog in his sequence;
and I prefer to think of Cornaro, the Italian centenarian, who began at
forty to restrict his diet (though this I care less for), and wrote of
himself at eighty-three: "I enjoy a happy state of body and mind. I can
mount my horse without assistance; I climb steep hills; and I have
lately written a play abounding in innocent wit and humor. And I am a
stranger to those peevish and morose humors which fall so often to the
lot of old age."

Granting some other choice of mental employment,--for writing that kind
of a play seems nowadays too useless an occupation even for an old man's
leisure,--this is the kind of an old man I should like to be.

In the light of recent scientific research with flies, Cornaro probably
inherited his longevity from long-lived ancestors, and would have done
about as well on a less restricted diet: he might reasonably have
lasted as long if not as comfortably. Ideas have changed since Pope
asked himself,--

    Why has not man a microscopic eye?--

and promptly answered,--

    For this plain reason, Man is not a Fly.
    Say what the use, were finer optics giv'n,
    T' inspect a mite, not comprehend the heav'n?

Man since then has provided himself with a remarkably good microscopic
eye. He has inspected the mite, and discovered resemblances between this
innocently disgusting little insect and himself, which make it
desirable, in some cases, to suspend the swatter, and study instead of
assassinate. Granting that the proper study of mankind is Man, the
proper study of mankind is Flies; for the days of a fly present an
entertaining and instructive parallel to the years of a man: a
seventy-year-old man and a seventy-day-old fly are contemporaries;
other things being equal, they might almost be called twins. Confined in
glass bottles and observed impartially from birth to burial, each baby
fly, it appears, inherits a maximum number of days on this perplexing
planet, and lives fewer according to the activity with which he expends
his inheritance. If flies had copybooks one might compose a maxim for
little flies to copy,--

    Do not fly too much or fast,
    And you will much longer last.

Thus one scientific gentleman has watched, godlike, the lives of 5836
flies--3216 fair flies (if I may so call them), and 2620 of their
natural, and only, admirers--from their separate birth-minutes till each
in turn paid his or her little debt to nature, and passed away. It is an
odd thing to contemplate--this self-election of a man to the positions
of guardian, health officer, divine providence, nursemaid, matchmaker,
clergyman, physician, undertaker, and sexton to 5836 flies. Yet it
redounds to his credit, and is another proof of the poet's contention
that we men are superior: for what fly would ever think of studying us
to find out anything about himself? And, by deduction, I, like the
little fly, inherit my span of life, although either accident or a germ
may get me if I don't watch out.

But even if man, like the fly, inherits his individual length of life,
he will, again like the fly, go on living it with little concern as to
whatever invisible string may be fastened to his inheritance. He will
think hopefully that any ancestor he has had who died by violence or a
germ might otherwise have lived to be as hale and hearty as Father
William, that lively sage whose habit was to stand on his head at
intervals, and to enter a door by turning a back-somersault. Heredity
is still a mystery; the ancestry of free men is much more complicated
than that of flies in bottles; and any of us, if he anxiously carried
his genealogical research far enough back, would find a goodly number of
forbears, prematurely carried off, from whom he might reasonably have
inherited quite a lot of what the scientific mind calls the
"hypothetical substance or substances which normally prevent old age and
natural death." Flies growing gracefully old in glass bottles therefore
need not worry us, and every ancestor who has been hanged is a reason
for optimism.

And there is another reason even more valuable than a pendent ancestor.
You and I, gentle Reader, have souls (though there may be times of
discouragement when we wish we hadn't), and old age is a mere trivial
incident in our jolly eternal lives. Willy-nilly, we begin growing
older, by the conventional measurement of time, with our first breath;
but who can prove that we are not in reality very much older than we
look in the beginning, and very much younger than we look in the end? I
get these sober thoughts from the laboratory rather than the pulpit,
from evolution rather than dogma. O aged fly, to whom your seventy days
are a long life and your glass bottle a perfectly natural and normal
world in which to have lived it! O aged man, to whom your seventy years
are a long life, and who may also have lived it, for all you know, in a
kind of glass bottle, big enough to contain comfortably this little
planet and all the visible stars! Whoever respects age for its own sake
must impartially salute you both.

"It is a man's own fault," said Dr. Johnson, then seventy years old,
but no pantaloon, "it is from want of use, if the mind grows torpid in
old age." And so plausible is this observation, that any reasonably
intelligent man might make it to his wife at breakfast without at all
astonishing her. Here, to be sure, one gets no help from flies in glass
bottles who depart this world according as they fly more or fly less,
for theirs apparently is a democracy in which no outside observer can
yet say that any one fly thinks more or thinks less than another. A
scientific study of 5836 old men (in biographies instead of bottles)
would very likely do no more than verify the generalization that any
thinker may make at breakfast. And this being the case, civilization
tends naturally enough to reduce the number of pantaloons. Universal
education, books, newspapers, magazines, politics, movies, anything and
everything that to any degree employs and exercises the mind, postpones
its torpidity; and statistics indicate that an increasing proportion of
babies live to be middle-aged people--but a decreasing proportion of
middle-aged people live to be old enough to become pantaloons. For many
a not-so-very-promising baby survives nowadays who would have perished
under earlier conditions; and many a man gets to middle life who would
otherwise be dead already, and lacks the "pep," as a popular magazine
editor might say, to get very much further. What a survival of the
fittest, for example, was that of the beautiful Galeria Copiola, who, I
have read, made her first dazzling appearance in the theatre of ancient
Rome at the age of ninety! She acted and danced; and Roman playgoers of
seventy, sitting in the front rows, had opportunity to become madly
infatuated with a charmer twenty years their senior, such as now falls
only to the lot of the college undergraduate or the tired business man.
And if anybody doubts this surprising youthfulness of Galeria, I offer
the corroborative evidence of the seventeenth-century pamphlet, "The
Olde, Olde, very Olde Man; or the Age and Long Life of Thomas Parr," in
which John Taylor, the Water Poet, describes the pre-Adamite who was
brought up to London at the age of 152, met the King, and had such a
great good time in general, that his death nine months later was
attributed to over-excitement.

    He was of old Pythagoras' opinion
    That green cheese was most wholesome with an onion;
    Coarse meslin bread, and for his daily swig,
    Milk, butter-milk, and water, whey and whig:
    Sometimes metheglin, and by fortune happy,
    He sometimes sipped a cup of ale most nappy.

(I have looked up "metheglin," and I find it to have been a "strong
liquor made by mixing honey with water and flavoring it, yeast or some
similar ferment being added, and the whole allowed to ferment." "Ale"
was also a liquor, but made from malt. "Nappy" means heady and strong:
"Nappie ale," says an old writer, was "so called because, if you taste
it thoroughly, it will either catch you by the nape of the neck or cause
you to take a nappe of sleepe." The use of these drinks, it may still be
argued, shortened Parr's life; but the fly-research that I have
mentioned seems to indicate that their tendency to decrease physical
activity by inducing "nappes" may have materially helped him to conserve
his inheritance of longevity.)

But these cases are exceptional, and for my part I have no desire to be
the Thomas Parr of the twentieth or twenty-first century. It is more
important to live right (and there, indeed, is a job for anybody!) than
to live long; and old age, like young love, is often oversentimentalized.
Mr. Boswell, I think, oversentimentalized it when he asked his
long-suffering friend, "But, sir, would you not know old age?... I mean,
sir, the Sphinx's description of it--morning, noon, and night. I would
know night as well as morning and noon." And the doctor restored the
subject to its proper place when he answered: "Nay, sir, what talk is
this? Would you know the gout? Would you have decrepitude?" He might,
indeed, have gone further. "Do you suppose, sir" (he might have added),
"you will know night when you see it? Why, sir, what does a baby know
about morning?"

So with Pantaloon: we comparative youngsters have only an external and
objective idea of him--his slippers, his stockings, his peevish and
morose humors, his feeble mirth and empty garrulity. What living is
really like to him we cannot know until we are pantaloons ourselves, and
then, mayhap, we shall have forgotten what living is like to us now; let
it suffice that we shall probably be far less bothered by our shrunk
shanks and piping voices than we now believe possible. At the same time,
it will do no harm for some of us to "watch our step." Already I--and
there must be many another like me--am sometimes a little peevish and a
little morose; a mere _soupcon_ reasonably explainable by natural
causes--but there it is! I am hardly aware of it myself. Yet when it is
called to my attention by those nearest and dearest to me, I experience
an odd, perverse inclination to be more peevish and more morose than
before. I _enjoy_, I take a queer, twisted, unnatural, hateful,
demoniac pleasure, like Mr. Hyde when Dr. Jekyll turned into him, in the
idea of being more peevish and more morose. Here indeed is something to
look out for: resist that inclination, and we are laying the foundation
of a serene and respected old age; obey that impulse, and we comfort the
Devil, and run the risk of some day becoming, not only old men, but old
nuisances. I do not know, though I very much doubt, that one old fly is
ever more peevish and morose than another old fly; but with mankind,
whose superior intelligence so often makes trouble for his associates,
the variations are visible. Savages, unhampered by the conventions of an
artificial civilization, have efficiently knocked their elders on the
head in consequence.

Let us, then, do our best to beat the Devil, and prepare for that Indian
summer, which, with all respect to Shakespeare, is the true sixth age
of man. And they reach it best (to judge by some who have got there) who
do their daily work with a good conscience, share their incidental joys
with others, and meet their troubles in the spirit of that stout old
seaman, Sir Andrew Barton, as I the other day saw his ballad quoted with
reference to R. L. Stevenson:--

      A little Ime hurt, but yett not slaine;
    Ile but lye downe and bleede a while,
      And then Ile rise and fight againe.




VII

THE OLDE, OLDE, VERY OLDE MAN

_Now concernynge the Soule, it is a Queer Thynge consydering that it
lives in the Bodie yett dieth nott; and so I conclude that the Soule was
made separate, and thys Bodie for its brief use and tenement; and how it
gets in and gets oute I cannot tell you. And belyke there bee all sortes
and condiciones of Soules, some goode, some bad, some so-so; but because
Goode is better than Evil, and because they lyve in Eternity, the bad
Soules will finde itt oute in time, and become goode; and the so-so
Soules will learn wisdome, and cease of their foolishnesse. But why they
were nott alle made alyke to start, that I cannot tell you; nor juste
how they was made._--THE SAGE'S OWNE BOKE.


It was a poetess, I am glad to say, and not a poet, who wrote the once
popular lines:--

    Backward, flow backward, O tide of the years!
    I am so weary of toil and of tears,--
    Toil without recompense, tears all in vain,--
    Take them, and give me my childhood again.

Many a voice no doubt sagged under this load of pathos as it read "Rock
Me to Sleep, Mother" to a little group of sympathetic listeners; but if
such melancholies are to be set on paper, and circulated in print, I am
unchivalrous enough to wish that joyless occupation on the gentler sex.
Most of us perform prodigies of toil, which seem to receive scant
recompense, and shed figuratively many a bucket of seemingly useless
tears. But I do not imagine that this sad poetess was half as badly off
as she seemed to think; and, more than that, she had only to wait long
enough, and keep alive long enough, to get her childhood back without
asking for it. Time, the Groceryman, in due season would hand her a
second childhood in many respects "just as good" as the first; for we
who are betwixt and between can observe an unintelligent ignorance of
later troubles in one condition, neatly balanced by an unintelligent
forgetfulness of them in the other. Our lugubrious poetess, one might
say, was neither more nor less than asking the tide of the years
obligingly to assist her to commit suicide. Had her request been
granted, there would have been one more child in the world--and one less
poetess.

An impressive parallel may, indeed, be drawn between these two
childhoods--the first a period of dependence upon its elders, and the
second of dependence upon its youngers, and each, to the reflective
observer, a pretty evenly balanced reversal of the other. It is as if,
in the beginning, the whole family of recognizable human
characteristics, Curiosity, Memory, Affection, Dislike, Ambition, Love,
Hate, Good Nature, Bad Temper, and all the rest of them, were moving,
one after another, into a new house; and as if, in the end, the whole
family, one after another, were leaving an old one. The very youngest
and the very oldest men in the world seem equally equipped for living in
it--"sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything"; and Baby, a
little older, when he goes out in his perambulator is much like ancient
Thomas Parr being conveyed to London as a human curiosity in a "litter
and two horses (for the more easy carriage of a man so enfeebled and
worn with age).... And to cheere up the olde man and make him merry,
there was an antique-faced fellow, called Jacke, or John the Foole."

Why, I myself, meeting a baby in a perambulator, have made such antic
faces that I might fairly have been called Jacke, or John the Foole, by
anybody who saw me, and all to cheere up the younge man and make him
merry. A little older yet, the child will run and play, rolling his
hoop, spinning his top, enjoying the excitement of tag and
hide-and-go-seek; and I dare say that the old man, a little younger than
before, would be just as happy with hoop and top (if he were again
introduced to them), and would have a grand, good time at tag and
hidey-go if he had other old men and old women to play with, and his
youngers would let him. I do not mean that he would do any of these
things as well as the child; but it would please him as much to do them
to the top of his aged bent, though now and then a flicker of remembered
convention, which the child has never known and considered, would make
him self-consciously abandon these simple pleasures. Even as an old cat,
caught trying to catch its tail, will sit up with dignity and pretend
that it wasn't.

There was once a custom of including a skeleton, or perhaps a mummy, in
the festivity of a banquet, to remind the diners of their mortality,
and, for all I know, the after-dinner speakers of the shortness of time;
though very likely they soon got used to their silent companion, and
took their mortality as lightly as most people do at dinner. An "Olde,
Olde, very Olde Man," as a contemporary writer called the unpicturesque
human ruin I have just referred to, would, it seems to me, have answered
the same purpose, and answered it better. Human nature takes neither the
skeleton nor the mummy with continuous seriousness, and proves by its
attitude that, if we instinctively fear death at one moment, we
instinctively ridicule our fear at another. I have read it argued that
man with his clothes on is nevertheless naked,--such arguments seem to
amuse the philosophers,--and by the same entertaining process of
reasoning we are all skeletons together, though some may worry lest
others consider them too fat for romantic admiration. Or, again, to the
man who believes that death snuffs him out like a candle, this skeleton
at the feast might easily become an urgent reminder that he is still
living, and he would most unwisely stuff himself out like a toy balloon
while he still had a chance. But your olde, olde, very olde man is a
reality: he is both dead and alive; his presence, to say nothing of his
table manners, should tend to make each guest regard death as a friend
rather than an enemy, and his state of mind and body prove such a
warning against pride in either, that even the after-dinner speakers
would take notice and modestly shorten their speeches.

Let it not be imagined that I lack respect for age. I tell you frankly,
ageing and respected Reader, that so long as you can intelligently read
even this essay, you are _not_ seriously old; and when you cannot, you
won't know the difference, and no respect of mine will be of any value
to you. Your time has not come to sit propped up at table as the latest
modern improvement on the skeleton at the feast; and if ever it does,
you, my friend, will not be there. Where you will be, I cannot faintly
imagine, and neither churchmen nor philosophers help me, for the
churchmen are too objective and the philosophers too abstract; the best
I can do is to take John Fiske's word for it, who knew far more about
both science and metaphysics than I can hope to, when he says the
materialistic theory that the life of the soul ends with the life of the
body is "perhaps the most colossal instance of baseless assumption that
is known to the history of philosophy." But when its house has become a
ruin, my soul will certainly have sense enough to look for something
more habitable, and may conceivably depart while there are still a few
embers burning in the furnace, leaving the fire to die out when it will.
Man is a conventional being, and perhaps his most astonishing convention
is a funeral.

But the custom has long gone out of thus poignantly reminding diners
that a time is coming when they will have no stomachs; and olde, olde,
very olde men will get no invitations out to dine for any suggestion of
mine. Fortunately there are other uses for them. They are, for example,
a source of innocent pride to their families. "Grandpa was eighty-nine
his last birthday, and he still has a tooth." They interest the million
readers of the morning newspaper. "Friends from far and near gathered
yesterday to celebrate the 101st birthday of Mr. John Doe, 17 Jones
Avenue. The venerable patriarch, who can still walk unaided from his
place of honor by the steam radiator to his cushioned chair in the
dining-room, when asked to what he attributes his ripe old age, replied
with astonishing intelligence that the winters are longer than they used
to be. Mr. Doe was surrounded by 247 living children, grandchildren, and
great-grand-children." These are visible uses; but this olde, olde, very
olde man may have, invisibly, a more important function; and the
helplessness of age, like that of infancy, may well have been a
necessary factor in the slow conversion of our ape-like ancestor into
you and me.

I have commented elsewhere on the natural astonishment of the first
parents who realized, with their inefficient prehistoric minds, that
_this_ baby belonged to _them_, and how, in the considered opinion of
able scientists, the little hitherto missing link joined father and
mother into the first human family. Tending and providing for Baby made
the cave a home; but I suspect it was a long time before tending and
providing for Grandpa added another motive for the cultivation of those
higher qualities that distinguish man from all other animals. Why, there
were savages who ate him! Yet in due time the olde, olde, very olde man
became such a motive, and to-day man is the only animal that takes care
of its grandfather. When you think of the differences between men to-day
and men then, between men then and the ape-men before them, and between
men now as they go about their various occupations, it seems quite
possible that ape-men had no souls at all, and that some men to-day have
rudimentary ones, millions of years behind others in evolution. It
explains much. And so, wherever there is an olde, olde, very olde man, I
dare say the care his youngers take of him is doing them good; they
might even reverse the parental platitude of punishment, and say,
"Grandpa, this does me more good than it does you."

But this proud possession of an olde, olde, very olde man does not
always work visibly toward such beneficent ends. His obstreperous
infancy, masquerading in mature garments, sometimes exhausts the
patience of his youngers; and his permanent conviction (often the only
sign of intelligence left) that he knows more than they do, and perhaps
more than anybody else, makes their task difficult: it is one thing, so
to speak, to take care of a baby when it is growing up, and another
thing to take care of a baby when it is growing down. Then, indeed, one
needs the assurance of immortality, the conviction that Grandpa is,
little as one might think it, still growing up, and that this simulacrum
of Grandpa that still remains to be looked after, must not be taken too
seriously. These olde, olde, very olde men are not all just alike: there
are grandpas whom anybody might be proud to take care of, and grandpas
whom anybody might be excused for wishing (as the brisk, modern phrase
has it) to sidestep. And the explanation of this diversity, as of much
else that puzzles us in a puzzling world, may be that they were not all
just alike when they were babies. Inside their thin and tiny skulls some
had better brains than others, brains with more of those wonderful
little pyramidal neurones, which, able scientists (unless I get their
message twisted) tell me, correlate, connect, assemble, and unite our
individual ideas, memories, sensations, and intellectual and emotional
what-nots. Men, in short, may be born free, but they are not born equal.

But why worry? If the individual soul is still young, it will keep on
growing in wisdom and experience; nor will it lose touch with other
souls that are akin to it, and, in the measurement of eternity, its
contemporaries; and it will have a better and better house to live in,
with ever more modern improvements in the way of pyramidal neurones. As
the March Hare conclusively replied to Alice, when she asked why the
three little sisters who lived in the treacle-well learned to draw by
drawing everything that began with an M, "Why not?"

So if ever I become like the valetudinarian described by Macaulay, who
"took great pleasure in being wheeled along his terrace, who relished
his boiled chicken and his weak wine and water, and who enjoyed a hearty
laugh over the Queen of Navarre's tales," I hope that somebody will
considerately push my chariot, boil me an occasional chicken, and keep
handy my spectacles and the Queen of Navarre's mirth-provokers. The weak
wine and water I shall have to do without. But my soul, I like to think,
which is the Me for work and play, love, friendship, and all the finer
things of life, already will have closed the door of its house and gone
away. And as it goes, I like to think, also, that it whistles cheerfully
a little tune of its own, the burden of which is "Life is long."






End of Project Gutenberg's The Seven Ages of Man, by Ralph Bergengren

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SEVEN AGES OF MAN ***

***** This file should be named 42110.txt or 42110.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/1/1/42110/

Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
