The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Irish Penny Journal, No. 2, Vol. I,
July 11, 1840, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Irish Penny Journal, No. 2, Vol. I, July 11, 1840

Author: Various

Release Date: February 25, 2013 [EBook #42201]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IRISH PENNY JOURNAL, JULY 11, 1840 ***




Produced by Brownfox and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by JSTOR www.jstor.org)









THE IRISH PENNY JOURNAL.


    NUMBER 2.      SATURDAY, JULY 11, 1840.      VOLUME I.


[Illustration: ENTRANCE TO THE GREAT CAVE OF KISH-CORRAN, AS SEEN FROM
THE INTERIOR.]




THE CAVES OF KISH-CORRAN.


Among the many wonders of Ireland, as yet undescribed and little known,
even to Irishmen, beyond their immediate localities, the subject of our
prefixed illustration has every claim to find a place, and to attract our
attention as a subject equally interesting to the geologist, artist, and
historian. That it should have hitherto remained unnoticed, as we think
it has, while objects of the same description in other localities less
remarkable and interesting have been repeatedly described, may be
attributed chiefly to the circumstance of its situation being remote from
any leading road, and in a wild and rarely visited district of country,
namely, the barony of Corran, in the county of Sligo. Of this barony, the
mountain called Ceis or Kish-Corran, is the most striking geographical
feature. It is composed of tabular limestone; has a flat outline at top,
but is precipitous on its sides, and rises to an altitude of upwards of a
thousand feet. To the traveller journeying from Boyle to Sligo it must be
a familiar and pleasing object, as, after passing the little town of
Ballinafad, it offers, for some miles of the road towards the west and
south-west, the charms of a mountain boundary in contrast to the rich
woods of Hollybrook, and the delightful vistas of the water of Lough
Arrow, or Arva, which skirt the road along the east. But the most
precipitous and noble point of Kish-Corran is presented to the west, and
is not seen by the traveller on this road, which must for a time be
abandoned to enable him to see it, as well as the wonderful caves which
open on its face, and to which we have now to call the attention of our
readers. On this western side, the mountain, to within a hundred feet or
two of its summit, presents a green but boldly sloping grassy face,
formed of the debris of the rocks above, which rise perpendicularly, and
look more like a wall--lichen-stained and ivy-decked--formed by the
Cyclops or giants of old, than creations of nature's hand. And such
impression is increased in no small degree by the lofty and magnificent
caves, which present themselves like doorways, and lead into the inmost
recesses of the mountain. It is of one of these entrances, and the most
remarkable for grandeur, that our illustration attempts to give an idea.
Its height is no less than twenty feet. How far the caves extend, we are
unable to speak with certainty; they are undoubtedly of great extent,
and, if the local accounts are to be trusted, reach even to the opposite
or eastern side of the mountain, and contain lakes of unfathomable depth,
and spars of unimaginable beauty.

A spot so striking to the imagination could not be, in Ireland, without
its legends of a romantic and singular character; and some of these are
of a most remote antiquity, and connected with the earliest legendary
history of our country. In the ancient topographical tract called the
Dinnseanchus, which gives the origin, according to the poets, of the
names of the most remarkable mountains, lakes, rivers, caves, forts, &c.
in Ireland, we are told that Corran received its name from the harper of
Diancecht, to whom that magical race, called the Tuatha de Danann, gave
the territory as a reward for his musical skill; and popular tradition
still points to the cave of Kish-Corran as his residence, according to
the ancient form quoted in the Dinnseanchus:--

"Here used to dwell the gentle Corann, whose hand was skilled in playing
on the harp; Corann was the only ollave of Drancich (with whom he
lived), in free and peaceable security.

To Corann of the soft music, the Tuatha De gave with great honour a free
territory for his skilful playing, his knowledge, and his astrology. Here
was he, this generous man, not without literature or in a churlish
fortress, but in a place where the stranger was at liberty to a free
sojournment with him, this liberal prosperous man."

The same authority accounts for the prefix _Ceis_, or, as it is
pronounced, _Kish_, which is applied to the mountain by a very singular
legend, according to which it would appear that it was originally the
name of a lady, who with five others were, by a charm compounded with the
nut-fruit, metamorphosed into pigs, the unhappy Ceis herself being here
subsequently slain. However this may be, there is nothing improbable in
the supposition that the caves of Kish-Corran were in former times the
favourite dens of the wild boar, the wolf, and many other animals now
extinct; they furnish a secure retreat to the fox and many other wild
animals at the present day.

    P.




ON BENEVOLENCE OF CHARACTER.

BY MARTIN DOYLE.


If it be afflictive, on one side, to reflect upon the deeds of cruelty
and oppression which prevail upon earth, through the instrumentality of
man, it is delightful, on the other, to perceive that human reason,
instead of being abused and perverted into a source of tyrannical
oppression, is occasionally exercised, as it ought to be, in promoting
happiness and social harmony, even among brutes; in producing that degree
of peaceful concord, which it has been proved may exist among animals
whose natural antipathies are the most violent imaginable--that feeling
which disarms the strong among them of all desire to tyrannise over and
destroy the weak, and is brought into exercise by a steady and
persevering _system_ of early training (and consequent acquirement of
abiding habits), directly opposed to _that_ which prompts us to place a
whip in the hand of a child.

I have been led into this train of contemplation, from having recently
witnessed a practical illustration of the wonderful effects producible by
what may fairly be termed a benevolent system, for there is no degree
whatever of harsh discipline connected with it--no starvation, no blows,
nothing of that "reign of terror," under the influence of which Van
Amburgh has doubtless effected his dominion over the most ferocious of
beasts; the exhibition of which power, while it surprises, does not
please us; for, though, by an effort of the imagination, the mind may be
led for a moment to the anticipation of the scene in which "the wolf
shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid,"
it quickly considers this surprising display of human power with painful
sensations, from the conviction that extreme severity of discipline alone
has enabled man in this instance to attain his despotic sovereignty, and
that the unnatural results which he beholds are an evidence that the
legitimate dominion granted to man "over every thing that moveth upon the
earth," has in this case, as in ten thousand others, been overstrained
and abused.

While animals of prey are in a state of nature, they either avoid each
other, or meet in deadly contest, according to the degree of their
antipathies; and until He who has impressed their dispositions upon them
shall bid them lie down together in peace, no efforts of puny man can
avail in changing their habits, except under such rare circumstances as
confirm the general law of instinct which leads them to destroy each
other. But the dislike which many of the domesticated animals entertain
for each other, is greatly increased by the encouragement which they
receive from man. The dog, which under other treatment would be familiar
with the cat or the hog, is taught from his _puppyhood_ to pursue and
worry each of them; the cat instinctively defends herself with those
claws which are her natural weapons, and she scratches her opponent's
face, and through their after life they are never thoroughly reconciled
to each other, but live proverbially as "cat and dog." The hog cannot
defend himself from the teeth of the dog; his ears are torn by them; he
cannot retaliate, but he lives ever afterwards in dread of the whole
canine race. Dogs, which otherwise would live in harmony together, are
taught to fight; their natural jealousy is encouraged, and they are
rendered bullies by profession.

That the dread of man is in a certain degree naturally upon every beast
of the field and bird of the air, cannot be disputed; but this feeling is
increased considerably by the _experience_ which many brutes have of
man's caprice or tyranny, and this dread is transmissible (as may be
justly inferred from cases which are perfectly analogous, such as the
acquired habit of pointing at game) to their posterity.

A benevolent man, living, as we read of Robinson Crusoe, among his goats,
ceases to be an object of apprehension to the animals around him; even
birds, habituated to his kindness and protection, would become divested
of the dread of man; and each successive generation of those familiarized
birds would probably become more and more disposed to associate with him,
if he were systematically kind and encouraging in his manner. Such
experiments with the brute kind, it is true, can be but extremely
partial, and are unattended with any very practically useful results in
_themselves_; but, as respects _the education of children_, they are of
extreme utility in exciting tender and benevolent feelings, and awakening
the intellectual faculties from subjects merely sensual or idly amusing;
they teach us "to look from Nature up to Nature's God."

There never was a better founded observation than that of the late Mr
Cobbett, that no one should be entrusted with the care of the nobler
animals who had not been habituated to treat the lesser ones with
kindness.

I love to see a child feeding his rabbits or pigeons, and familiarly
playing with them, consulting their tastes, and contributing to their
comforts by every means within his power. Surely such a pursuit should
not be rudely discouraged; how much more humanizing than the desire to
possess "whips for a penny," to which I have recently adverted! It tends
to render a child compassionate in his disposition to all God's
creatures, and unwilling to hurt, for the sake of inflicting pain, or
from thoughtless mischief.

And I am just enough of phrenologist to be of opinion that, if there be
any remarkable developement of the organ of destructiveness, this may be
sufficiently counteracted by the exercise of feelings which have
connection with the faculty of benevolence, and so modified, by avoiding
all pursuits of a cruel nature, as to constitute, with God's blessing, a
benevolent character, which, by the indulgence of the inherent
inclination to cruel sports, would become of the opposite nature; for
there is unquestionably an adaptation of the mind, as well as the body,
to the circumstances under which individuals are placed. It is with the
faculties of the human mind as with the habits of brutes; when exercised,
they acquire strength, and gradually become more developed and confirmed;
ay, and become hereditary too in proportion to their original or
gradually progressing degree of developement. How important, then, that
the higher faculties, on which depends the elevation of the moral
character, should be strengthened by use and exercise! But I have
digressed far from the illustration which I was about to give at the
beginning, of a practically benevolent system of brute education.

There stands on every fine day, near one of the great London bridges, a
mild, cheerful looking man, who exhibits to the passers by an assemblage
of animals of the most decided antipathies by nature, who live together
in the same large cage in perfect harmony. The notion of collecting into
one family such apparently discordant members, originated, I believe,
with a gentleman who has long made the brute animal economy the subject
of his investigations, and who suggested to John Austin the harmlessness,
at least, of earning the means of his support by the novel and
interesting exhibition of a cat, rats, mice, Guinea pigs, hawks, pigeons,
owls, and starlings, and, I believe, another bird, under the same limited
roof, and with perfect freedom of access from one to another. One of the
pigeons is now hatching, without any cause of alarm from the hawk for the
safety of her anticipated offspring; for that bird is so far from being
of a destructive temper, that he frequently feeds a young starling with
meat from his own bill, and apparently of his own impulse; nor do any of
the birds manifest apprehension from the cat, which has been almost born
in their company, and although frequently permitted to go outside the
cage and take the air without restraint, returns soon again, without
having had her disposition corrupted by intercourse with bad company,
takes up her favourite position in a corner, where the rats most
affectionately run up to her for warmth and concealment from the public
gaze, behind her furry and comfortable back. The pigeons are also allowed
their liberty occasionally, but they soon return to their quarters, which
habit has rendered pleasant to them.

Now, I by no means recommend to parents, for their children, the
establishment of a _domestic menagerie_, for the care of this would be
extremely troublesome, and occupy time which should be spent to far
better purpose; nor do I recommend the keeping of useless pets of any
kind, my object being merely to point out, by actual exemplification,
what the benevolent _principle_, systematically exercised, _can_ produce
even under the most adverse circumstances. On what are called pets, such
as lapdogs and parrots, much warm, kind feeling is often unprofitably
bestowed. When PONTO dies of plethora, or POLL from cold or infirmity,
sensibilities are sometimes called forth, which would not flow from the
contemplation of human sufferings. The servant who is daily employed to
wash and comb the dog, is perhaps never sent upon an errand of mercy to
any of the distressed families around the mistress, and a wayworn group
of children may unavailingly solicit the luxurious food which is placed
before the pampered _pet_, without shame or scruple.

I do not intend to maintain the pet _system_ in general; it is the
principle of humanity which I seek, not that mawkish sensibility which
causes so many to weep at the dramatic exhibition of fictitious woe, who
would not drop one tear of sympathy for real misery, divested, as in the
scenes of every-day life, of the embellishments and romantic adjuncts
which false sentiment delights in. We all, it is true, require some
especial objects of endearment, something on which the feelings of the
heart may find expansion, else we become cold, selfish, and very
disagreeable to every one. In childhood, therefore, the disposition to
love even the domestic animals born for our use, should be sedulously
fostered, but not to such excess as to weaken the affection for parents,
brothers, sisters, or friends. The principle should only be checked,
however, in its exuberance, never crushed. In mature years the affections
should have the highest objects, and in those instances in which the
Creator has denied the gift of offspring to us, I would respectfully
suggest to those who desire pets, the adoption of an orphan or two, whom
they may train both for earth and heaven, in preference to any other
perishable idols.




LAGHT-E-OURIA.

"The longest way round is often the shortest way home."--_Old Proverb._


I was not more than eight or nine years old when the following anecdote
was related to me by the actor or sufferer, whichever he might be called,
himself. He was a fine stately old gentleman. His family had once been
powerful; but in the troubles with which the page of Ireland's history is
filled and darkened, they had been reduced, and he, fleeced by a
treacherous guardian of the last remnant of the property, had been
compelled to accept the influence of friends in procuring him a
commission in the civil service (for in war he would not serve them) of a
government which he loathed.

He was of a stern and rather gloomy disposition, and rarely condescended
to social or pleasant conversation, much less to notice children; but
sometimes the genial fire within would thaw the icy surface, and diffuse
life and light around. The bow could not be kept ever bent: the garrison
was too feeble to keep constant watch and ward, and a view would be
sometimes gained, through an open door, of a heart fitted by nature to
give and receive all sublunary happiness. I heard his history long after
his career had closed. But it has nothing to do with the present
story--another time for it.

I had been playing marbles with my cousin and playfellows; we quarrelled,
and were proceeding to blows, when Mr M----, who was sitting, unobserved
by us, on a stone bench, and had witnessed our dispute, called to us both
to approach him. He took one on each knee, and looking alternately at us,
said, in a tone so mild and different from his usual harsh commanding
voice, that we could scarcely think it was the same man who spoke, "Boys,
beware of sudden ungovernable passion; under its influence you might
commit, in one moment, an act which would embitter, with remorse and vain
regret, all your subsequent life.

"When a young man, I once suffered so keenly the consequence of my
ungovernable temper, that were I to live a thousand years, I could not
forget it. I see that your curiosity is excited, and you would like to
hear the circumstance; but it is connected with a ghost story, and I must
tell you all." "Oh! do, Mr M----," said I, "for papa says there are no
such things as ghosts or fairies, and nurse says there are; and nurse
never tells lies, and certainly papa would not, and I do not know what
to think between them." "Well," said he, "I shall tell you the story, and
it will help you to form your judgment.

From the high road between Cork and Cloyne, and about three miles from
the latter, a small by-road, or 'borheen,' branches off. It is of very
ancient date, belonging to times when men were guided by the position of
the sun during the day, and the stars at night, and when, consequently,
their track lay over mountain and hollow, through wood and bog, as the
avoidance of impediments (except to a very short distance) would have
thrown them quite out of their reckoning, and toil was much less regarded
then than in these degenerate days. The road by Laght-e-Ouria is
decidedly a shorter way to Cloyne than the high road from which it
diverges; but a saying has arisen since it was made, 'the longest way
round is the shortest way home,' that has been so often used as a
conclusion to a debate upon 'which of the roads should be taken,' that
the wisdom of our ancestors is voted folly, and their ways are no longer
trodden.

Other reasons than the unevenness of its surface are however not wanting,
and many a headstrong drunken farmer, upon whom all other argument had
been tried in vain, has been induced to turn his horse's head to the new
road, by the soft voice of the 'Vanitha' whispering in his ear that 'it
would be midnight ere they passed Laght-e-Ouria.'

Laght, in Irish, signifies a heap of stones, and it is customary in
Ireland, wherever a murder has been committed, for every passer-by to
throw a stone upon the spot. A heap, or 'laght,' is thus soon formed, and
it receives the cognomen of the unfortunate individual whose untimely end
it commemorates.

In the beginning of the month of October 1775, when residing in Cork, I
received a note from the Earl of Inchiquin, desiring me to meet him at
Cloyne between five and six o'clock on the following morning, on most
pressing and important business. I immediately ordered my horse,
determining to dine with a particular friend who resided about half way,
to jog quietly on in the evening, and have, what I always relished, a
night's repose on the spot where my morning's business awaited me.

Mr Ahern was one of a class well known in the south as 'gentlemen
farmers,' being mostly reduced gentlemen who farmed a portion of the
grounds that once belonged to their ancestors, in many instances to
themselves.

Hospitality, the virtue they most prided themselves upon, they carried to
a fault; and my friend Ahern, in common with the rest, made it a rule,
without an exception, that a bottle either of wine or whisky once opened,
should be finished on the spot. Upon this occasion, however, I felt it
necessary to demur. The last bottle of whisky having been opened without
my consent, and feeling that, although I was still capable of proceeding
on my journey, the half of what remained would put it completely out of
the question, I positively refused to take another drop except the
'Dhuch-an-dhurrish,' or parting glass, and resisting all his
importunities to stay the night, not relishing a ride of a dark morning,
I took my departure about an hour before midnight.

I never was a believer in ghosts or fairies, or any class of idle,
mischievous, disembodied creatures; but upon this occasion, whether from
melancholy or loneliness, or the darkness, which was so intense as to
force me to proceed very slowly, or from my friend's stirrup-cup having
slightly obnubilated my reasoning faculties without producing the usual
valour, I know not. Certain it is, I did not feel comfortable, and wished
most fervently for just as much light as would enable me to urge my horse
forward at a quicker pace, but the more I wished for light the darker it
became, until my eyes ached in endeavouring to penetrate the gloom.

A row of tall trees ran along at each side of the road, and nearly met at
top, and the fitful breeze just agitating the leaves, or occasionally
moving the branches so as to cause a low, moaning, creaking noise, jarred
my nerves, and made me feel still more and more unpleasant. At length,
when I had arrived at an intolerable pitch of nervous excitement, the
darkness became less intense, and I could just distinguish a breach in
the row of trees upon the right, which marked the locality of the
'laght.' Taking advantage of the opportunity, I pressed my horse. He
seemed to have become as nervous as myself, for he answered to the slight
touch of the spur with a loud snort and a violent spring, which I
considered so totally uncalled for, as to give me a very fair excuse for
being in a passion, and venting my irritability, which I proceeded to do
with my whip, as giving my muscles more action than the spur; but
instead of plunging along at a mad gallop, as I expected, my horse
reared, and turning sharply round, attempted a flight back. Again and
again I turned his head to the road, but onward he would not go; this was
very strange, for he never shied or started. At length I tried the
soothing system; for I must confess that the general belief that horses
see what is hidden from the eyes of man, occurred to me, and I coaxed and
patted him, and spoke gently and encouragingly to him, but he kept
sidling, and tramping, attempting to turn, and answering every word or
pat with a long snore, whilst I could perceive by his forward pricked
ears and the direction of his head, that his eyes were rivetted upon the
heap of stones. Whilst thus engaged, and having somewhat quieted his
terror, I heard a sound like the rattling of chains. Round and away with
Rainbow. I brought him up again nearer than before. Again the chains
clanked, and I could distinctly hear that they were chains, ere my horse
bolted and ran again. 'The third time,' said I, 'contains a charm, they
say; and, man or devil, ghost or fairy, I'll overhaul you. Who's there?'
No answer. 'Who's there?' Clank, clank, went the chains. I could see
nothing. The perspiration was running down my face, but I was furious.
'By the hand of my grandfather, if you do not answer me, I'll go to you,
and whilst sinew and whalebone last, you shall feel the butt of a loaded
whip. Who are you?' Again the chains clanked, and my horse would not
consent to keep such company any longer. I dismounted, and, taking him a
few paces back, tied him to a tree, and returned on foot to the spot.

Behind the trees was a deep trench partly filled with water; a hawthorn
hedge grew at the farther side, and threw its branches nearly across. As
I approached the 'laght,' the rattling of the chains again rose,
accompanied by a plashing, scrambling noise, as of something breaking
through the hedge and trench. I sprang forward, striking with the heavy
handle of my whip, having twisted the thong firmly round my hand and
wrist, I had only beaten air, but the violence of the blow and weight of
the whip carried me forward; and, missing my footing in the darkness, I
fell against, or rather upon, the monster of the chains; and having made
a furious grasp to save myself, judge what was my horror at catching a
handful of hair, such as might be expected to be felt upon an arctic
bear! The creature slipped from me, and with a tremendous plunge and
frightful rattling of its chains, gained the road, overwhelming me
completely in the muddy ditch.

Just at that instant the whole truth flashed across my mind; and with a
vengeful rage that I am ashamed to confess, I sprang up, and pursuing my
unfortunate victim, a jackass, who could make but little exertion to
escape, being spancelled with a piece of an iron chain, I kept my oath,
by belabouring poor Neddy until I could strike no more from exhaustion. I
then turned to remount my horse; but he was gone, having left the
principal portion of his bridle hanging on the bough for a keepsake.
Nothing saved Neddy from a second edition, with considerable additions,
but the recollection of the hour, the necessity of catching my horse, and
the confounded distance I should have to travel afterwards, for he was,
of course, gone the wrong way.

I ran as fast as I could, but was soon obliged to pull up. I found that I
was carrying weight, and no light weight, for my clothes were saturated
with water, and covered thickly with mud. Having scraped off as much as I
could of the latter, I got along, and about two o'clock reached my
friend's house again, entertaining a faint hope that Rainbow had returned
to the last stall he had occupied; and so he had.

Not finding the gate open, he had jumped the road fence, and was quietly
grazing with two or three other horses. There was now light enough to
distinguish objects at a hundred yards; and I could see his saddle, but
how to catch him was now the question, for he had at all times a
propensity to keep his liberty when he had got it; and to think of
catching him without help was idle. I approached the house, but just then
recollected that my friend had a couple of dangerous mastiff dogs, of
extraordinary size and ferocity; and as the entrance to the front of the
house lay through the farm-yard, in which they were kept, it would be as
much as my life was worth to approach it. My only chance was to get at
the rere; and having made the circuit of a few fields, I reached it, and,
selecting a window likely to belong to some sleeping apartment on the
ground floor, I tapped at it with the butt of my whip. Receiving no
answer, I repeated the knock, and placing my head close, heard a female
voice exclaim, 'Marcy save us, it's the boys;' and the speaker hurried
barefooted from the room. I knew that the only female inmate of the
house was the daughter of an old follower of the family, now called
'_the_ servant man;' for Pat or Paddy fulfilled the manifold duties of
butler, footman, gardener, and valet, besides taking a hand at every
thing about the farm in turn.

Whilst considering whether or not I should knock again, I had the
satisfaction to see, by the still increasing light, that the shutter of
an upper window was cautiously opened; then the window was gently raised;
and I waited for the appearance of a head to announce myself, when a
bright flash issued forth, accompanied by a tremendous report. Away went
my hat; and at the same instant the dogs opened, not barking, but with
yells upon yells, as if Pandemonium was let loose. 'Ahern! Ahern!' I
roared out, 'what are you at? 'Tis I--don't you know me?--M---- My horse
has run away; he's in your field, and I want help to catch him.' I
bellowed this at the top of my voice, in the vain endeavour to drown the
'bow-wow-oo-oo-oo-oo-oo' of the dogs. The answer I received was, 'You to
(hiccup) blazes (hiccup); here's at you again, you villains.' I threw
myself down as my quondam kind host discharged a second blunderbuss at
me; but was instantly on my legs again, as the roaring of the dogs
announced their rapid approach. They had in some manner got out of the
yard. I glanced hurriedly round for some place of shelter. A large
arbutus tree was the nearest object, and into it I scrambled, just as the
dogs appeared in full career upon the field.

They made repeated springs at me, for I was not above eight feet from the
ground, but I contrived, by well-aimed kicks in the jaws, to keep them at
bay for a while. I was thus pleasantly engaged for about five minutes,
when Ahern and four or five men made their appearance. He carried a
blunderbuss in his hand, another tucked under his arm, and a brace of
holster pistols stuck in his waistband. His old servant had the master's
fowling-piece, and the rest, who were farm servants, had pitchforks.

As soon as I espied them, I roared out, 'Call off the dogs, I'm M----,
you stupid drunken rascal.' 'Ho! ho! he's--hic--up in the arbutus.'
'Blur-an-agers, tare-an-taffy, sir, you'll shoot the dogs!' said old
Paddy, knocking up the levelled blunderbuss. 'It's Mr M----; don't ye
know his voice? Down, Fin--down, Oscar--down with ye,' and with
persuasive words, and still more persuasive blows of the fowling-piece,
Pat drew off the dogs, and took them away. I came down in a state of
indescribable rage. Nothing vexes a man so much as the consciousness of
being an object of mirth or ridicule.

Having paused awhile for words, I poured forth a torrent of abuse on
Ahern. He hiccupped once or twice, looked with the most stupid
astonishment at me, and, when I paused for breath, 'damned me but it
would have been due to me to be shot; firstly, for leaving a Christian
habitation at the dead hour of the night; secondly, for going at that
hour by a haunted road; and, thirdly, for attempting to get in at a back
window of his house, when I well knew that I had only to raise the latch,
and walk in at the front door.'

'How the d---- could I get past your infernal dogs?' said I.

'Good dogs always know friends from foes,' he replied; 'but--hic--it was
just one of your tricks--you wanted to frighten me, and--ha! ha! ha!--you
got frightened yourself, and the devil's cure to you!--hic.' I was
beginning again, when he stopped me by saying, 'that if I thought he had
taken any advantage of me, matters could be made even;' and he produced
the holster pistols, saying 'that they were both double loaded; he had
charged them himself, and I might have my choice.' In a minute the ground
was measured; the men were ordered not to interfere, but stand aside; and
Ahem himself asked me if I was ready, and immediately said 'fire!'

Well might he say 'the pistols were double charged;' they were trebly
charged--loaded to the muzzles. In fact, it was safer to stand before
than behind them. I was stunned by the report, and remained standing,
until roused by one of the men asking me 'was I shot?' adding, that 'I
had killed the masther.' In an instant the whole impropriety of my
conduct flashed before me, and I ran to my poor unfortunate friend, who
lay motionless. I knelt down by his side, and never shall I forget the
piercing anguish that at that moment penetrated my soul. All his
virtues--his amiable qualities--his kind-heartedness--every good action
of his life with which I was acquainted, and they were numerous, appeared
in order before my mental vision; and then conscience, shaking the aegis,
on which appeared, not the Gorgon's, but my poor friend's blackened
countenance, before me, and asking, 'Why did you do this?' froze up my
faculties, and converted my outward seeming into stone; but within, there
was a foretaste of the eternal torments.

Involuntarily I called upon his name; the sound of my own voice started
me, arousing me to a sense of keener anguish; and I was about to break
forth into some violent extravagance, when my unfortunate friend opened
his eyes, and, looking at me with kindness, said, 'M----, you did not do
it; my pistol burst and has hurt me--take me into the house--I'm sober
enough now.'

Upon examination it was discovered that a piece of the pistol barrel had
hit him above the forehead, cutting a path through his scalp; one of his
fingers was broken, and his hand and arm were severely contused, but he
seemed to think nothing of it, but desired one of the men to go for old
Biddy Hoolaghan, a celebrated doctress, and the rest of them to catch
Rainbow. I refused to leave him in his then present condition, of which I
was the unlucky cause, but he would not hear of my stopping. 'No, no,'
said he, 'your business cannot be neglected; and as to fault, we may
divide the matter between us, and bear each his own share. If I did not
make the ridiculous rule, that a bottle of whisky once opened should be
finished at once, I would not have drunk after you left me, but have gone
to bed at once; in which case I'd have known your voice, and all would
have been right. And if you were not so lazy as to object to a morning
ride (which you must take after all), you'd have staid where you were,
and saved all the mischief. But, at all events, remember for the rest of
your days that 'the longest way round is often the shortest way home.'

Rainbow was caught at length. Ahern lent me a bridle, and at four o'clock
I faced the road again, and arrived at Cloyne, without further adventure,
at five, thoroughly soaked with the rain, which commenced heavily soon
after my second departure, and for which I was thankful, as it partially
cleansed me from the ditch mud, and accounted for my dripping and soiled
state when I made my appearance before the earl, which I was obliged to
do, without changing my dress, at half past five."

    NAISI.




CHARACTER OF O'DONNELL, PRINCE OF TYRCONNELL IN THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

(From the MS. Annals of the Four Masters, translated by Mr O'DONOVAN.)


A.D. 1537. In this year died O'Donnell (Hugh, son of Hugh Roe, who was
son of Niall Garve, who was son of Torlogh of the Wine), Lord of
Tyrconnell, Inishowen, Kinel-Moen,[A] Fermanagh, and Lower Connaught; a
man to whom rents and tributes had been paid by the people of other
territories over which he had acquired dominion and jurisdiction, such as
Moylorg, Machaire-Chonnacht, Clann-Conway, Costello, Gallen, Tirawly, and
Conmaicne-Cuile, to the west, and Oireacht-ui-Chathain (the patrimony of
O'Kane), the Route, and Clannaboy, to the east; for of all these there
was not one territory that had not given him pledges for the payment of
his tribute of protection. It was this man who had compelled the four
lords who ruled Tyrone in his lifetime, to give him new charters of
Inishowen, Kinel-Moen, and Fermanagh, by way of confirmations of the
ancient charters which his ancestors had held in proof of their right to
govern these countries; and this he had done, in order that he might
peaceably enjoy jurisdiction over them, and have authority to summon
their forces into the field when he wanted them. Neither in all this is
there anything to be wondered at, for never had victory been seen with
his enemies--never had he retreated one foot from any army, whether small
or numerous; he had been distinguished as an abolisher of evil customs,
and a restrainer of evil deeds, a destroyer and banisher of rebels and
plunderers, and a rigid enforcer of the Irish laws and ordinances after
the strictest and most upright manner; he was a man in whose reign the
seasons had been favourable, so that both sea and land had been profusely
productive while he continued on the throne;[B] a man who had
established every person in his country in his rightful hereditary
possessions, to the end that no one of them might bear enmity to another;
a man who had not suffered the power of the English to come into his
country, for he had formed a league of peace and amity with the King of
England so soon as he saw that the Irish would not yield the superiority
to any one chief or lord among themselves, but that friends and blood
relations fiercely contended against one another; and a man who had
carefully protected from harm or violation the Termon-lands (or
sanctuaries) belonging to the friars, churchmen, poets, and ollaves.

This O'Donnell (Hugh, son of Hugh Roe) died on the 5th of July, in the
year of salvation 1537, being Wednesday, in the monastery of Donegall,
having first taken upon him the habit of St Francis, having bewailed his
crimes and iniquities, and done penance for his sins and transgressions.
He was buried in the same monastery, with all the honour and solemnity
which were his due; and Magnus O'Donnell was nominated to succeed him in
his place by the successors of St Columbkille [viz. the Abbots of
Kilmacrenan, Raphoe, and Derry], with the permission and by the advice of
the nobles of Tyrconnell, both lay and ecclesiastical.

[A] Now the barony of Raphoe.

[B] Cormac, in his instructions to his son Carbry, tells him that "when a
worthy prince reigns, the great God sends favourable seasons." It is
worthy of remark that, among the oriental nations, the same notion
prevails to the present day; and the poets of the East frequently express
their anticipations of favourable weather and abundant harvests upon the
accession of a peaceable monarch to the throne.




THE HARP.


The harp was the favourite musical instrument, not only of the Irish, but
of the Britons and other northern nations, during the middle ages, as is
evident from their laws, and from every passage in their history in which
there is the least allusion to music. By the laws of Wales, the
possession of a harp was one of the three things that were necessary to
constitute a gentleman, that is, a freeman; and no person could pretend
to that title, unless he had one of those favourite instruments, and
could play upon it.

In the same laws, to prevent slaves from pretending to be gentlemen, it
was expressly forbidden to teach or to permit them to play upon the harp;
and none but the king, the king's musicians, and gentlemen, were allowed
to have harps in their possession. A gentleman's harp was not liable to
be seized for debt, because the want of it would have degraded him from
his rank, and reduced him to a slave.

The harp was in no less estimation and universal use among the Saxons and
Danes; those who played upon this instrument were declared gentlemen by
law; their persons were esteemed inviolable, and secured from injuries by
very severe penalties; they were readily admitted into the highest
company, and treated with distinguished marks of respect wherever they
appeared.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANECDOTE OF JEROME DUIGENAN, A HARPER.--Some curious tales are told of
Jerome Duigenan, a Leitrim harper, born in the year 1710. One is of so
extraordinary a character, that, were it not for the particularity of the
details, which savour strongly of an origin in fact, the editor would
hesitate to give it publicity. He is, however, persuaded that he has it
as it was communicated to O'Neill, between whose time and that of
Duigenan there was scarcely room for the invention of a story not
substantially true. It is as follows:--"There was a harper," says
O'Neill, "before my time, named Jerome Duigenan, not blind, an excellent
Greek and Latin scholar, and a charming performer. I have heard numerous
anecdotes of him. The one that pleased me most was this. He lived with a
Colonel Jones, of Drumshambo, who was one of the representatives in
parliament for the county of Leitrim. The colonel, being in Dublin, at
the meeting of parliament, met with an English nobleman who had brought
over a Welsh harper. When the Welshman had played some tunes before the
colonel, which he did very well, the nobleman asked him, had he ever
heard so sweet a finger? 'Yes,' replied Jones, 'and that by a man who
never wears either linen or woollen.' 'I bet you a hundred guineas,' says
the nobleman, 'you can't produce any one to excel my Welshman.' The bet
was accordingly made, and Duigenan was written to, to come immediately to
Dublin, and bring his harp and dress of _Cauthack_ with him; that is, a
dress made of beaten rushes, with something like a caddy or plaid of the
same stuff. On Duigenan's arrival in Dublin, the colonel acquainted the
members with the nature of his bet, and they requested that it might be
decided in the House of Commons, before business commenced. The two
harpers performed before all the members accordingly, and it was
unanimously decided in favour of Duigenan, who wore his full _Cauthack_
dress, and a cap of the same stuff, shaped like a sugar loaf, with many
tassels; he was a tall, handsome man, and looked very well in
it."--_Bunting's Ancient Music of Ireland._




THE MOUNTAIN WALK.

BY J. U. U.


    From the haunts of busy life,
    Homes of care, and paths of strife,
    Up the breezy mountain way,
    'Mid the upper fields of day,
    Let me wander, far and lonely,
    Without guide, save nature only;
    And still ever as I go,
    Lose all thought of things below,
    Cast all sorrow to the wind,
    While the low vales sink behind:
    Fetterless and spirit free
    As the merry mountain bee.
    Like a spirit, thought and eye
    Buoyant between earth and sky,
    There to bask in free pure light
    On the joyous mountain height;
    Dallying with the breeze and shower,
    Claiming kin with every flower,
    Catching iris dreams that glance
    On the breath of circumstance.
    Changing with the changeful scene--
    Solemn, sombre, gay, serene:
    As each change fresh wonders bring,
    Weaving thought from every thing.

      Oft let shadowy hollows fall,
    And grey cliffs' embattled wall
    Crown the gloom with hoary height,
    Where the raven wheels his flight.
    Or green vale unfolding soft,
    In the lonesome crags aloft
    Shut the far down world from view.
    There, long up ether's darkening blue,
    The eye may gaze for worlds unseen,
    In the skyey void serene,
    And weave visions strange and fair,
    Of the starry empires there--
    Spirits changeless, pure, and bright,
    In their glorious vales of light;
    Till some wild note break the spell
    From sequester'd rural dell
    Where the mountain goatherds dwell:
    So to break the wild fond dream,
    And to man bring down the theme;
    For all earthly things impart
    Thoughts of Man to human heart.

      Then from towery crag on high,
    If far city win the eye,
    Glittering through the misty air,
    'Twere a prospect meet and fair
    For the lone sequestered gaze
    O'er its wide uncertain maze,
    Then to muse on wealth and fame,
    And on every specious name
    That gilds the dross of earth below,
    Till, from reflection, wisdom grow.
    Wisdom:--not that sense which cleaveth
    To the world where all deceiveth;
    Not grave prudence, hard, yet hollow--
    In the beaten round to follow
    Lengthened aims, in life's short day,
    While the ages glide away:--
    But that moral, old and sage,
    Said and sung in every age;
    Old as man--yet ever new,
    Heard by all, and known to few;
    Murmur of Being's wave, that still,
    Unheeded as the babbling rill,
    In the world's noise, makes music only
    'Midst the hush of deserts lonely.

      Last, from o'er the seaward steep,
    Let me view the spacious deep,
    While the billows break and flow
    In the caverned gloom below.
    There let cloud and sunbeam flee
    O'er the sunned and shadowy sea--
    Light and dark in fleeting strife,
    Like the vanities of life;
    So to dream of joy and woe,
    Imaged in the gliding show,
    As they come, and as they fly,
    To the verge of sea and sky;
    So our joys and sorrows flee,
    Onward to eternity.
    Then away in spirit wrought
    By the voluntary thought,
    Where the heath is freshly springing,
    Where the sky-borne lark is clinging
    On mid air with lively song,
    Which the echoing cliffs prolong;
    O'er wild steep and dreamy hollow,
    On, still onward let me follow.
    While the airy morn is bright,
    While rich noon is at its height,
    Till eve falls with sober grey,
    Freely let me roam away.




APOLOGUES AND FABLES,

IN PROSE AND VERSE, FROM THE GERMAN AND OTHER LANGUAGES.

(_Translated for the Irish Penny Journal._)

No. 1.--THE DISCONTENTED STONES.


A mason was one day at work, building a stout wall to protect a garden;
nigh him lay a piled-up heap of stones, which he took into his hands in
succession, one by one, according as he wanted them. The stones on their
part submitted with exemplary quietness to be handled and introduced into
their appropriate places; for they were fully aware that the mason's
object was to erect a wall, and they knew equally well that that object
could not be attained, if they took it into their thick heads to rebel
against the principle upon which he was proceeding. At last, however,
somewhat to the mason's amusement, it did so happen, after he had
accomplished a considerable portion of his task, that one contumacious
fellow, upon being laid hold of, began to talk very big upon the rights
of stones, and the tyranny of coercing stonekind in general, declaring,
that for himself, whether in a wall or out of a wall, he was determined
to enjoy that liberty which was the birthright of every stone upon the
earth, and that he would sooner be trodden into powder than surrender it.

"I tell you plumply and plainly, Master Mason," said he, "that I will not
be subjected to restraint. I must have scope for my energies. I must have
room to look about me, and be able to roll to the left side or to the
right, as I think proper, like a free agent!"

The mason, on hearing this, could not refrain from laughing. "Truly,"
said he, "I have lighted here on an eccentric specimen of the stony
tribe. So, my good friend, you wish to have room to roll about in--eh?"

"Precisely," returned the other.

"Did you ever hear of the adage, 'a rolling stone gathers no moss?'"

"Yes, and despise it," answered the Stone; "a moss is a token of
antiquity; and antiquity and absurdity are synonymous terms in my
vocabulary. May heaven defend me from ever gathering moss!"

"Whew!" whistled the mason, in a manner to indicate mingled surprise and
contempt. "Pray, what do you take yourself to be?"

"What do I take myself to be! Just a stone--a wall stone--neither more
nor less."

"And are you content that I should allot you a position in the wall?"

"Certainly I am."

"And yet," said the mason, "you declare you will not be satisfied to
remain under constraint? You must have room forsooth for your energies!
Really your inconsistency is most ridiculous. Come; I have no time to
lose; tell me at once what you would be at. Will you go into the wall, or
shall I deposit you again on the ground?"

"I have made up my mind to oblige you by going into the wall," replied
the Stone, with a patronizing air; "but I will not be swindled out of my
natural rights! Liberty is the first of these--and I must have liberty,
even in a wall."

"So you shall," said the man; "your liberty will be that of obtaining
your just position in the wall, and of maintaining it undisturbedly."

"Bah! what stupid, sneaking notions you have of liberty, surely! I tell
you again that I must have space to expand and expatiate in. Do you think
that I can stoop to fill the office of a mere wedge?"

"You tire out my patience, friend," said the mason: "there is no use in
arguing the matter further. I see I cannot get you to take up your
lodging in the wall: I see I must throw you on the earth again."

"Very well; be it so," returned the Stone: "liberty before all things!
Pitch me to a respectable distance from the other stones, that I may feel
myself unshackled and independent. I have the same right to be a
free-_stone_ that you have to be a free-_mason_."

"There, then," said the mason, and with the words he cast the Stone from
him into the middle of the highway.

The Stone was now in the full enjoyment of its darling liberty.
Exceedingly did it congratulate itself. For a time also everything went
well with it. The summer was a mild one; the skies were bright, and the
foot of the passenger was continually transferring it to a new locality,
and showing it daily more and more of the _ways_ of the world. But, alas!
the summer could not last for ever: autumn came, and brought with it
clouds of dust and showers of yellow leaves; and when the wind-gusts had
subsided, there fell on the earth heavy torrents of rain; and the highway
was covered with mire, and the measure of the isolated stone was
forthwith taken for a surtout of mud; and there it lay, fallen from its
high estate, and completely confounded by the passing eye with the vilest
of the rubbish in its vicinity.

But this was not the worst: in the course of a few weeks, the rains
continuing still to fall, and the mire to accumulate, the earth gave way
under it, and it became, as it were, imbedded in a hole produced by the
force of its own pressure on the soft soil, till at last no part of it
remained above ground except the upper surface. Unfortunately, too, there
was no longer a possibility of retracing its steps, for the wall was now
erected and the mason was far away. Nothing remained for it but to sink
deeplier and deeplier into the earth, until not a vestige of it remained
visible to the eye. Alas! for our poor Stone! Oh, Liberty! Oh,
Independence! ye are indeed desirable objects of attainment; but surely
they who seek ye at the expense of the great combining principle of
social order, commit a senseless and irremediable blunder.

In the spring following, the mason was employed in building another wall.
He hoped that his work would be suffered to proceed without interruption
on this occasion at least, but he was speedily undeceived; for one of the
stones, just as in the previous year, began to grumble, and protest
against the treatment to which it was about to be subjected. The mason,
recollecting the former scene, was on the point of flinging it away at
once; but second thoughts suggested to him the eligibility of first
trying the effect of a little reasoning and remonstrance, "for, after
all," said he, aloud, "no two stones are alike, and though I have met
with one that was proof against argument, another may be less intractable
in my hands."

"There it is!" cried the Stone impatiently; "no two stones alike!--that's
your foolish mistake, your ignorance. I tell you that there is no
difference between one stone and another: I am just as good as any stone
in the wall, and I insist on my prerogatives."

"Hoity-toity!" exclaimed the mason, "but you are a sturdy beggar! Will
you be condescending enough to define your prerogatives? I will thank you
to tell me briefly how you would have me dispose of you."

"I want to be a corner-stone, then," said the rebel, "and a corner-stone
I will be. I stand on my rights: all stones are equal; so, quick!--let me
occupy a position in the corner."

"That you cannot do, my friend," returned the mason: "don't you see that
the corner-stones are already in their places?"

"I see that well enough," said the Stone; "but you can take one of them
out, and install me in its place. I have as clear a right to be there as
any of them: equality is the badge of us all: every one of us is from a
common quarry: we are all stones alike. Take one of them out, and put me
in."

"Now, see how grossly inconsistent you are!" urged the workman: "all
stones, you assert, are equal, and have the same rights: yet you would
have me rudely displace and degrade one of them for your pleasure,
though, according to your own acknowledgment, you are not a bit better
than he is! Upon my word, but you have enlightened conceptions of what
constitutes equality. But I cannot stand here arguing the question with
you all day; my time is precious; I beg you will decide whether you are
satisfied to form part of the wall or not."

"Assuredly I am," said the other, "but only as a corner stone. How can
you be so blind as not to see that we are all stones alike, and all
therefore equal?"

"You _are_ all stones alike," replied the mason, "and so far equal, in a
certain sense; but your equality consists merely in your being all liable
to serve as wall-stones, not in your being all qualified for the place of
corner-stones."

"A truce with your slavish doctrines!" cried the malcontent; "either make
of me a corner-stone, or build your wall without me."

"Is that your final decision?" asked the mason. "I warn you not to trifle
with me, for I cannot let my work wait for you any longer."

"I have said it," said the Stone. "I would see your wall trampled into
dust, and the whole universe along with it, before I would surrender my
great principle. Do what you please."

"Go, then, refractory wronghead," exclaimed the mason, "go and enjoy your
equality where none will be likely to dispute it!" And so saying, he cast
the Stone from him with a vigorous jerk; and the Stone, after it had
completed its journey through the air, fell down, and from the force of
its own gravitation sank several feet low into the bottom of a deep and
slimy pool.

This was, for all historical purposes, the termination of its existence.
What became of it in the pool ultimately, it is impossible to conjecture,
for half a century has elapsed since; but as a total extinguisher was put
upon its aspirations after notoriety by the accident, it is highly
probable that if not worn quite away by the friction of the surrounding
mud and water, it was at least gnawed to the core, in a moral sense, by
its regrets for the folly of its past misconduct--regrets which we may
suppose to have been shared in a pretty equal degree by its twin-brother
of the preceding year, which had stickled so stoutly in its colloquy with
the mason for its favourite theory of liberty and independence.




THE AIR WE BREATHE.


The objects which come every day before our eyes, the offices which
involuntarily and almost unconsciously we at each moment must perform in
order that we may live, are precisely the subjects concerning which the
mass of mankind are least curious, and of the true nature and utility of
which they are the most completely ignorant. It is thus with the air we
breathe. There is no person but is aware of the necessity of breathing,
and of the motion of the air caused by winds; but how few have asked
themselves, What is air? How much is there of it? Could the same air be
always used for breathing? How do fishes manage living in water in place
of air? Yet the information thus obtainable might be the means of saving
the lives of hundreds, as certainly the ignorance on these points has
been the source of death, by painful and lingering torture, in many
cases. We purpose, therefore, now to give some information about air, to
show the importance of it to mankind, and to indicate how much we owe to
the Omniscient Providence that has given to air the properties that we
find it to possess.

Although "trifles light as air" has become a proverb, yet air is
positively heavy. A hogshead of air weighs about ten ounces; this is
heavier than the gas which is burned in the streets and shops, of which a
hogshead would weigh only seven ounces; and very much heavier than
hydrogen gas, with which balloons were formerly filled, a hogshead of
hydrogen gas weighing only two-thirds of an ounce. A balloon filled with
hydrogen, or even with coal gas, rises into the air, as oil or a cork
rises up through water. The air being thus heavy, presses upon the earth;
and by measuring the degree of pressure we can tell how much air there
is. This is done by an instrument termed a barometer--a glass tube closed
at one end, and which, having been filled with quicksilver, is turned
upside down in a cup containing quicksilver also. The tube being shut at
the top, the air does not press on the quicksilver inside, but presses
upon that in the basin; the quicksilver in the tube, which tends
naturally to fall down into the basin, is thus forced to remain up in the
tube by the pressure of external air; and it rises so high that the
pressure inside, of the quicksilver, and outside, of the air, is equal.
If the pressure of the air diminishes, the quicksilver falls; if the
pressure of the air increases, the quicksilver rises: and as all great
changes of the air are connected with changes of the weather, the
barometer is generally known and consulted as a sort of weather-glass.

Every space of an inch square supports fifteen pounds weight of air; at
the rate of ten ounces to a hogshead, the depth of the air would
therefore be about five miles. But it is much deeper, for air is what is
termed compressible--that is to say, it may by pressure be squeezed into
a smaller bulk; and hence the air next the ground, being compressed by
the portions above it, is much the heaviest portion. At three miles high
a hogshead of air weighs only five ounces, and at eight miles high only
two ounces; hence the limits of the air are much farther removed, and it
is known to extend to at least forty miles.

The office of the air is to support animal life: no animal can live
without air: even fishes require air. The water in which they swim
contains air mixed with it, and this water washing the gills, which are
their lungs, serves to them as the air directly acts on us. If we boil
water until the air is expelled from it, and let it cool in a close
vessel, we may drown a fish by putting it into such water, as easily as a
land animal; it could not breathe. It is thus that in the lakes on the
tops of very high mountains there are no fish. The heights are deserted
by land and by water animals, in consequence of the air being too thin to
support life. The way in which the air acts upon the body is very
interesting. The most abundant element of our food is what the chemists
term carbon, of which, in a gross manner, charcoal may serve as an
example. Now, we eat much more of this than we require for the supply of
our bodies, and it must be got rid of. This is done by its uniting in the
body with a substance termed oxygen, and forming carbonic acid, the sort
of air which boils up in soda water and ginger beer. This dissolves in
the blood, colouring it a deep purple, and escapes from it when by the
action of the heart the black blood is exposed to the action of the air
on the surface of the lungs. Now, the office of the air is to supply this
oxygen which removes the carbon from the blood. But the air is not pure
oxygen. If it were, it would act too violently. An animal which breathes
pure oxygen, becomes flushed, pants violently, and, if not choked, dies
of inflammation of the lungs, produced by the intense action. In the air
we breathe, the oxygen gas is diluted to the proper degree by another
gas, termed nitrogen, which is totally destitute of power; it does of
itself no good and no harm; it is the only substance that could be mixed
in the air we breathe, without interfering in any way. When thus the
blood loses, by exposure to the air in the lungs, its carbonic acid, it
takes oxygen in its place; from dark purple it becomes bright red, and is
then proper to take up a fresh quantity of carbon, and to sustain the
body in health by its removal.

When any thing burns in the air, it is the oxygen which is active. The
nitrogen dilutes here also the oxygen, and keeps its activity down to the
degree most suitable to our wants. If the air were pure oxygen, all our
domestic fires would be violent conflagrations; our iron pokers and
tongs, if heated red hot, would take fire and burn like squibs; no
comfort, no safety for society could exist. But in burning, this oxygen
is destroyed. If a candle be placed lighted under a glass bell, it will,
after a little, go out. The air will become unfit to support combustion.
Here also, as well as in the burning of coals, coke, gas, oil, charcoal,
&c. the oxygen is changed into carbonic acid, and precisely as a fresh
supply of oxygen is necessary for the continuance of life, so is it for
combustion.

The air contains about one part in five of oxygen, and, as has been seen,
this oxygen is liable to continual destruction by the breathing of
animals and the burning of fuel and of lights. An ordinary man spoils in
twenty-four hours 720 cubic feet of air, that is, a mass of air 11 feet 6
inches square and 6 feet thick. The burning of three ounces of charcoal,
or of a mould candle of six to the pound, produces the same effect. It is
not unusual in a factory to burn ten tons of coal a-day, which spoils
3,185,760 cubic feet of air, a mass of a quarter of a mile square and six
feet thick. If we multiply these numbers by the number of inhabitants, of
man and of all other animals upon the earth, and also by the quantity of
fuel burned all over the globe, it will be evident that without some
regulating power superior to all that mere human means could devise, the
air might ultimately become unfit to be the sustenance of living beings,
and all the numerous tribes of animated nature which now adorn its
surface, would be destroyed.

By the all-wise arrangement of Providence, however, the animals, in thus
converting the oxygen of the air into carbonic acid, become the means of
supplying nourishment to another class of beings equally interesting and
numerous. All vegetables breathe; but as animals take in too much carbon
with their solid food, so do plants obtain too little from the substances
that give nourishment to their roots. The animal breathes to give off
carbon, the vegetable breathes to take it up. The two great divisions of
living nature thus act in contrary ways upon the air; the oxygen consumed
by the animal or by combustion, is given out again by the carbon of the
carbonic acid becoming fixed in the plant of which it forms the woody
mass; and thus the composition of the air is kept balanced at its proper
point, and provision for the due nutrition of animals and vegetables is
secured.

The air we breathe serves, however, for other important uses. Without the
air, the fresh breezes which moderate the heats of summer could not
exist, and there would prevail in nature an eternal silence, for it is by
means of air that we not only breathe, but hear. The variety of aspect
given to the sky by the formation and rapid change of clouds, arises from
the mixture of warm and of cold damp air. If there was no air, there
might be dew, but there could never be a cloud.

Without the air we could not have the bright blue sky which gives to our
fine season its greatest charm. The heavens would be a vault of intense
black, in which the sun would appear alone a glaring ball of fire, whose
rays, unmitigated by the air which now absorbs them in their passage
through its mass, would be a continual source of ill. The blue sky, the
bright white clouds, arise from the sun's rays being partly stopped, and
turned from one object to another. The sun's rays really consist of light
of all the colours of the rainbow; of these the red portion is lost in
passing through the air, and the blue remains, giving the colour we
observe. Without the air, a place shaded from the sun would be in
absolute darkness; as it now exists, a quantity of light is scattered
about in every way by the different portions of the air, and thus an
agreeable shade provided in place of the total absence of all light. On
very elevated tops of mountains, where the traveller is placed above the
greater portion of the air, all these effects of its absence which we
have noticed, are found to exist. On the summit of Mont Blanc, a pistol
discharged is scarcely heard, and a companion once out of sight, may be
lost; for neither can he produce any noise by his own exertions, nor
could his voice reach his friends, even if he could speak; the sky is
deep indigo-coloured, or nearly black; and those objects on which the
sun's light does not directly fall, are seen with difficulty.

Such are the uses of the common air we breathe. Such are the benefits we
derive from a blessing, of whose existence when at rest we are almost
unconscious.




ABSENCE OF MIND.--A well-known gentleman of Magdalen College, Cambridge,
had taken his watch from his pocket, to mark the time he intended to boil
an egg for his breakfast, when a friend entering the room, found him
absorbed in some abstruse calculation, with the egg in his hand, upon
which he was intently looking, and the watch supplying its place in the
saucepan of boiling water.




EARLY RISING.--Six or seven hours' sleep is certainly sufficient, and no
one ought to exceed eight. To make sleep refreshing, the following things
are requisite:--To take sufficient exercise in the open air; to avoid
strong tea or coffee; to eat a light supper; and to lie down with a mind
as cheerful and serene as possible. We hardly ever knew an early riser
who did not enjoy a good state of health. It consists with observation,
that all very old men have been early risers. This is the only
circumstance attending longevity, to which we never knew an exception.




Printed and Published every Saturday by GUNN and CAMERON, at the Office
of the General Advertiser, 6 Church Lane, College Green, Dublin.




TRANSCRIBERS' NOTES


Page 10: developement as in the original (two occurrences)
Page 12: rere as in the original in "My only chance was to get at the
           rere"
Page 13: Donegall as in the original in "monastery of Donegall"
Page 16: Magdalen as in the original in "Magdalen College, Cambridge"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Irish Penny Journal, No. 2, Vol.
I, July 11, 1840, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IRISH PENNY JOURNAL, JULY 11, 1840 ***

***** This file should be named 42201.txt or 42201.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/2/0/42201/

Produced by Brownfox and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by JSTOR www.jstor.org)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
