The Project Gutenberg EBook of The College Freshman's Don't Book, by 
George Fullerton Evans

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The College Freshman's Don't Book
       in the interests of freshmen at large, especially those
       whose remaining at large uninstructed & unguided appears
       a worry and a menace to college & university society these
       remarks and hints are set forth by G. F. E. (A. B.) a
       sympathizer

Author: George Fullerton Evans

Illustrator: Frank Ingerson
             Raymond Carter

Release Date: April 4, 2013 [EBook #42467]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COLLEGE FRESHMAN'S DON'T BOOK ***




Produced by Henry Flower, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)








[Illustration: HELPFUL DONTS]

[Transcriber's Notes: The original text had some words superscripted on
this page. Those words have been surrounded by {curly braces} to signify
this.]



    T{HE} COLLEGE FRESHMAN'S
    DON'T BOOK

    {IN THE} INTERESTS {OF} FRESHMEN {AT} LARGE
    ESPECIALLY THOSE WHOSE REMAINING
    {AT} LARGE UNINSTRUCTED {&} UNGUIDED
    APPEARS A WORRY {AND} A MENACE {TO}
    COLLEGE {&} UNIVERSITY SOCIETY THESE
    REMARKS {AND} HINTS ARE SET FORTH
    BY G. F. E. (A. B.) A SYMPATHIZER

    THE ILLUSTRATIONS BY CHARLES FRANK INGERSON
    THE DECORATIONS & INITIALS BY RAYMOND CARTER

[Illustration]

    PAUL ELDER {AND} COMPANY
    PUBLISHERS ::: SAN FRANCISCO




    TO
    H. H. C.
    TOGETHER WE WERE
    SMALL FROGS
    IN THAT GREAT ACADEMIC PUDDLE
    THE OLDEST IN OUR LAND
    AND
    IN MEMORY OF THE POLLIWOG STAGE
    I DEDICATE TO YOU
    THIS PLUNGE


    _Copyright, 1910
    by Paul Elder and Company
    San Francisco_




CONTENTS


                                               Page
    As to the Place                               1
    As to Settling Down                           3
    As to Dress                                  11
    As to Dining                                 15
    As to Lectures and Studies                   18
    As to College Organizations and Friends      26
    As to Things in General                      32




ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                          Opposite
    Helpful Don'ts, _Frontispiece_                            Page
    The weather is generally the _only_ thing
          about a College Town not yet educated                  2
    Don't overdo the _decoration_ of your room                   8
    Don't dress too sporty                                      12
    Don't monopolize the _conversation_ at the table            16
    Don't fail to keep in mind the steps of _descent_           24
    Don't answer back if the Coach _speaks harshly_ to you      28
    Don't pawn your watch during your first year                34




AS TO THE PLACE


[Sidenote: THE COLLEGE TOWN]

DON'T imagine that you _own_ the _College Town_ from the moment you
strike it. Remember, there are prior claims, and you're not the _first_
squatter.

[Sidenote: ITS WEATHER]

_Don't_ expect the College Town to furnish you with good weather;
because it won't. The weather is generally the _only_ thing about a
College Town not yet educated. Of course, if you happen to have come
from Lapland or Patagonia, and do not know what good weather is, the
weather here _may_ suit you. The oldest inhabitants in a College Town
live to be very old; this is to be accounted for by the fact that they
are kept alive by their curiosity to see _what_ kind of weather is
going to develop next.

[Sidenote: THE COLLEGE SIGHTS]

_Don't_ forget that sight-seeing relatives and others coming on a visit
to the College, _must_ see the Library, the Gymnasium, the Dining Hall,
and the Athletic Field. These, and the Campus, are generally all the
sights there are. It is well to get this list carefully in mind _early_,
as it saves you from a panic at the last minute. You often think that
you will explore the place and get something _new_ to show people; but
this you never do. The above list is a fairly accurate one, and it
suffices. Those whom you are guiding about always pretend they are
_dreadfully_ interested and excited about every thing in turn. On your
first trip as official guide, you yourself see a great deal; on your
fiftieth, you try _not_ to.

[Illustration: THE WEATHER IS GENERALLY THE _ONLY_ THING ABOUT A COLLEGE
TOWN NOT YET EDUCATED]




AS TO SETTLING DOWN


[Sidenote: YOUR ARRIVAL]

DON'T think that your _mere arrival_ at College has made you able to
_relieve Atlas_ in holding up the World. The World's idea of you at this
point is, that you're something like a gold-fish just let loose in a
glass globe. It _will begin to expect_ something of you when you're
dumped into the big Ocean.

[Sidenote: YOUR RESIDENCE]

_Don't_, if you can possibly side-step it, begin to live in a place
which you do not like. The _Blue-Willies_ may lurk in the corners. Many
a _Freshman_ changes his residence about the _mid-year_, because he has
not made a careful selection at first. The moving often entails cracked
wash-bowls, broken pictures and casts, stifled oaths, and a sense of
_great unrest_ not appropriate to the season.

[Sidenote: YOUR LANDLADY]

_Don't_ treat your _Landlady_ shabbily if you happen to live in a
private house. Some Landladies are the best souls in the world. All of
them are proud and _descended from the best early families_ (you have
only to take _their_ word for this). Though they are often inquisitive,
their inquisitiveness often comes from their genuine interest in you.
Sometimes, _the more they know_ of your family history, _the less they
will charge_ you for oil and gas, at the end of the month.

[Sidenote: HER RIGHTS]

_Don't_ begin _too_ early in the term to make your Landlady's house a
_noisy abode_. She may get impatient and do something hasty, such as
even demanding your key, payment and evacuation. In _such_ an event you
see the full meaning of her appellation. Whereas, before you may have
thought that the word "land" in her title meant to _catch_, as to _land
a fish_, you now see that it is primarily derived from her ability _to
come down hard_ on a special occasion.

[Sidenote: THE DUSTING LADY]

_Don't_ be discouraged if you can't find anything in the right place
after the _dusting lady_ has put things in order. It's a _way they
have_.

[Sidenote: YOUR ROOM]

_Don't_ neglect taste in your room. How do you know but that somebody
may judge you by the way you decorate your study? Presumably, you were
not _raised in a barn_, and there can be no _harm_ in letting the
appearance of your room bear out this as fact.

[Sidenote: FITTING IT UP]

_Don't_ try to make a _royal residence_ of your room. Your taste may
alter. A College man's taste often undergoes rapid and violent
revolution _for the better_, within the first year.

[Sidenote: A WORD ABOUT RUGS]

_Don't_ think that you must have Turkish rugs. _Generally_, a _Freshman_
cannot tell the real article when he sees it. The man at the sale may
try to make you believe they'll never wear out. Never mind. You have
only to _get_ them to know what he means. Just get some old, reliable
patterns. There is a secret connected with this. The older and dirtier
they get, the more _Oriental_ they look. You've no idea how much
sweeping this saves.

[Sidenote: ABOUT BRIC-A-BRAC]

_Don't_ go in for a lot of fine china, the first term. How can _you_
tell but that your neighbors or visitors may not care as much for that
sort of thing as you? Remember, that in a room where costly china lies
about in profusion, a "rough-house" may be a more expensive variety of
entertainment than Grand Opera _with seats for the family_.

[Sidenote: ABOUT DECORATIONS]

_Don't_ get angry if a Senior comes into your room and looks about and
smiles. Probably, he's only remembering that _he_ once decorated his
room the way you now do yours. Just _keep your eyes open_ when you go
into older fellows' rooms. You'll soon learn that two crossed college
flags, a vile plaster copy of the Venus de Milo, and a copy of the Barye
Lion as _sole_ decorations may be lived down,--or later _pulled down_.
If you wish to be _exceptionally_ original, don't go in for either the
flags or the casts. Yet, in following years, these things may become
good old friends to remind you that _you_ were _once_ a Freshman.

[Sidenote: ABOUT FURNITURE]

_Don't_ overdo with respect to _furniture_, even if you can afford it;
it _may_ make some of your visitors uncomfortable. If you _can't_ afford
it, you'll be made uncomfortable yourself.

[Sidenote: THE COLLEGE COLOR]

_Don't_ mistake the _color_ of your College. A good many Freshmen do
this;--it is especially pathetic, by the way, to see a Freshman waving a
flag which is _off-color_ at a big game. Sometimes the mistake is
attributed to color-blindness. This is a charitable interpretation.

[Sidenote: ABOUT THAT STUDY-DESK]

_Don't_ buy a roll-top desk or an iron safe during your first year. You
know, you may not care to occupy one room _all through College_. We
heard of one house having to be torn down, that a Freshman might move
out with his roll-top desk. Not only this, but when he failed to find
another place, a house had to be built up around his cumbersome
furniture. It was a case of this or his _rooming in the desk_.

[Illustration: DONT OVERDO THE _DECORATION_ OF YOUR ROOM]

[Sidenote: GETTING ON]

_Don't_ think that you have fairly _got on_ to things while the tray of
your trunk is still _unpacked_.

[Sidenote: TAKING A HAZING]

_Don't_ look too sober if hazing happens to be in vogue, and the
Sophomores order you about. Remember that you can make the affair either
a _funeral_ or a _farce_; and it's pleasanter to be the leading man in a
farce than to be the principal at a funeral. The best way to get along
with Sophomores is to take them good-naturedly. Don't be nauseatingly
saccharine, for that's _just_ about as bad as getting mad about it. Just
fool them into thinking you're _enjoying_ yourself, and they'll stop.

[Sidenote: A TRICK ABOUT RECEIVING VISITORS]

_Don't_ neglect to _receive_ your _visitors_ as if you were glad to see
them. This is not encouraging hypocrisy, inasmuch as the recommendation
_need not include_ the laundryman or the tailor's collector. You
couldn't fool _them_, anyway. It is not polite, when visitors come,
always to be found with a green shade over your eyes. When a visitor
calls, look as if you had just been waiting for some one to talk to. If
you improve your time _between_ visitors, they ought not to cause you to
waste any valuable time.

[Sidenote: MUSICAL TEMPERANCE]

_Don't_ play the piano at all hours. Have a regular time for practice;
then your neighbors may _protect_ themselves. If you play the violin or
the trumpet, _don't overdo it_; you are tempting Fate.

[Sidenote: THE PROCTOR]

_Don't_ incur the anger of your Proctor by noisy conduct or disrespect.
Proctors--especially young ones--are apt to feel their oats and to
report you on slight provocation. But a friendly Proctor is a friend
worth having.




AS TO DRESS


[Sidenote: VARSITY AND PREP-SCHOOL FASHIONS]

DON'T wear your Prep-school hat-band, or flash your High-school
Fraternity pin upon your almost manly chest. These are stock
idiosyncrasies of the _Freshman_. Just remember that _School_ fashions
do _not_ prevail at _College_.

[Sidenote: THE "SPORTY" DRESSER]

_Don't_ dress too "sporty," during the first term. The effects you try
to imitate at _this_ period of the game are apt to be only the
superficial and amusing ones.

[Sidenote: A SHORT WORD ABOUT LONG HAIR]

_Don't_ wear _long_ hair. Hair, if left to grow as it listeth, may
attain to a surprising length within a single season. The Freshman year
is _not_ the time to test the accuracy of this statement. Wait till you
are a Sophomore; then you won't care to. Remember that long hair is the
_Poet's_ privilege (though _not_ always _proof_ of a Poet). To wear long
hair, you had better take out a Poet's license. In this respect a
_dog-license_ will do if you fail to qualify as Poet.

[Sidenote: WHISKERS AND SUCH]

_Don't_ feel it _incumbent_ upon you to wear a _beard_ or a _moustache_,
if you happen to have raised one on the farm or in England, during the
summer. Whiskers are the _plus sign_ of _masculinity_. Upper-classmen do
not appreciate them in Freshmen.

[Sidenote: ABOUT THOSE SPARKLERS]

_Don't_ wear too much _jewelry_; as an _over-amount_ of it suggests
trips to places where they _loan money_.

[Sidenote: HORSY ORNAMENTS]

_Don't_ affect stick-pins bearing large horses' heads or horseshoes,
thinking these will demonstrate that you _keep a gig_. The horsy
ornament connotes the coachman's white tie and the odor of the _stable_.

[Illustration: DONT DRESS TOO SPORTY]

[Sidenote: THAT CANE]

_Don't_ carry a _cane_ in your Freshman year; something is _very_ likely
to happen to it.

[Sidenote: THAT TALL HAT]

_Don't_ be found displaying a _tall hat_. A tall hat is a mighty nice
thing for Sister's wedding _at home_; but better _leave_ it there. Its
dignity is liable to fade, like the glory that was Greece and the
grandeur that was Rome. It was only because those nations got _too
chesty_, you remember, that the Vandals of old worried them.

[Sidenote: CRAZY MEN--CRAZY CLOTHES]

_Don't_ think that crazy or odd clothes are necessarily "College"
clothes. Lots of College men _do_ wear crazy clothes; but it isn't so
much because they're College men, as because they're _crazy_.

[Sidenote: SANE DRESS]

_Don't_ forget to dress neatly and up to your means. You owe it to
yourself to dress as _well_ as you can. I don't mean that owing this to
_yourself_ should necessitate your continually owing something to your
_tailor_. You do not _owe_ it to yourself to _owe anybody_.




AS TO DINING


[Sidenote: YOUR DINING PLACE]

DON'T begin by resorting habitually to the Quick Lunch. Nobody ever made
_friends_ at a Quick Lunch, except with the waitresses. Select a good
place where there are lots of fellows whom you will see continually. You
ought to pick out some good friends from among them.

[Sidenote: YOUR TABLE]

_Don't_ attempt, in a large dining hall, to get a place at a society,
club, or athletic table for which you have _not yet qualified_. You are
liable to _queer yourself_ from the start.

[Sidenote: TABLE TALK]

_Don't_ try continually to air the sum of _knowledge_ which you are
just assimilating. There are _few_ things more pathetic than the
first-year chemist who keeps asking you at table to "pass the NaCl," or
the fledgling psychologist who would try to prove that bread-and-butter
is matter for _the mind_ and not for _the stomach_.

[Sidenote: LOCAL EGOTISM]

_Don't_ keep telling how they do things in that part of the country
which _you_ come from. The assumption is, that since you came to
College, you are willing to _learn something_ of how they do things
here.

[Sidenote: LISTENING TO OTHERS]

_Don't monopolize the conversation_ at the table, especially if there
are older men around. You'll get yourself snubbed if you talk _too_ much
about _yourself_. Fellows don't care much whether your grandfather kept
a brake and ten horses, or drove a "shay" over the _plank-road_. Be a
good listener. Then, too, older men _like_ to be listened to. The
chances are you will learn a _sight_ more by hearing them than they will
by hearing _you_.

[Illustration: DONT MONOPOLIZE THE _CONVERSATION_ AT THE TABLE]

[Sidenote: KNOCKING THE GRUB]

_Don't_ continually _find fault_ with the things you have to eat. Act as
if you were used _to eating away from home_. Half the time the jokes you
make at the expense of the food come merely from an uncontrollable
desire to air your wit. "Knocking the grub" doesn't require _half_ so
much brains or individuality as _shutting up_ about it.




AS TO LECTURES AND STUDIES


[Sidenote: ATTENDANCE AT LECTURES]

DON'T forget to attend a _large per cent._ of your lectures. The
information dispensed in lectures is _often_ to be found _invaluable_ in
passing the Examinations.

[Sidenote: CHOOSING COURSES]

_Don't_ let yourself be mesmerized into taking a lot of things you feel
a positive _disinclination_ for. Many a Freshman has spoiled his first
year in this way; and, failing to pass, has left _College_ and become a
street-car conductor or a clerk.

[Sidenote: "SNAP" COURSES]

_Don't_ mistake the willingness to accept a "snap" course for a
_startling aptitude_ for a subject.

[Sidenote: ELECTIVE SYSTEM]

_Don't_ abuse the _Elective System_ if you are privileged to be at a
College where it is employed. It is a system which presupposes your own
_interest_ in your _intellectual welfare_. It is too easy to fill up
with a lot of unrelated subjects. You may say, "But I desire a broad
education." Very good. Did you ever go to a circus? There the prettiest
feats are performed upon the broad, spacious back of _one_ horse. The
rider gets the broadest-backed critter he can find that will keep
moving. Those who ride two and three horses _take a risk_. In College
you may find that when you try to do the _intellectual split_, you're
liable to _fall down between_ your horses.

[Sidenote: ABOUT MEETING PROFESSORS]

_Don't_ neglect any honest opportunities you may have to make friends
with an Instructor or a Professor. Meeting Teachers represents a
privilege and _not always_ necessarily a pull. As for knowing
Professors intimately, few do, except other Professors. As for their
knowing _us_ intimately, it might seem as if this seldom happens, until
it comes time to expel us.

[Sidenote: MALINGERING]

_Don't_ try to fool the College Doctor into believing that you can't go
to lectures, or are going to die, because you've sprained your left
thumb. Generally, the College Doctor is a shrewd man, or he would _not_
be the College Doctor.

[Sidenote: ABOUT REQUIRED READING]

_Don't_ fail to make a list of the _required reading_ in any course. And
do _some_ of it--say, a little more than will enable you merely to pass
the Exam. It is barely possible that the reading you have done in
connection with your College courses will some day prove you an
_educated man_. As for doing _all_ the reading that _all_ the
Professors require--well, a fellow _must_ sleep and eat.

[Sidenote: WORKING FOR EXAMS]

_Don't_ think that _Exams_ can be passed without any preparation. It
takes _some_. The _minimum_ has not yet been determined; nor has the
_maximum_. The _middlemum_ has even been known to vary, according as the
instructor imagines that the crowd _is_ or _is not_ taking the course as
a snap. The _little birdies_ are _surely_ in league with the Faculty.

[Sidenote: INTELLECTUAL NARCOTICS]

_Don't_ rely upon _special tutors_ to pass all your courses. It's lazy
and not entirely self-respecting. When our friend Gulliver went to
Laputa, he met certain Teachers who gave their pupils small intellectual
wafers. These they swallowed upon _empty stomachs_. As the wafers
digested, the tincture mounted to the pupil's brain, bearing the
proposition along with it. The same system of cramming exists today;
only it _doesn't always work as advertised_. A fellow resorts to special
tutors when he has lost confidence, and needs an _intellectual
narcotic_. Special tutors represent the drug-capsule of learning. _Why_
be a _dope-fiend_?

[Sidenote: IN THE EXAMS]

_Don't_ try in your _Exams_ to make a hit by writing long papers. The
_Exam_ is _not_ an endurance contest. Somehow, long papers don't take,
unless there is _some sense_ in everything you have written. If you
don't believe this, _try it and find out_.

[Sidenote: PREDIGESTED INFORMATION]

_Don't_ rely wholly upon _typewritten notes_ to get through your
courses. Many College Professors show no quarter to those whom they
ascertain to be addicted to this predigested form of information. Often
the Professor's life-specialty is the tracing of literary works to their
_sources_; so be careful. Better take notes in lectures; if this serve
no other purpose, 'twill keep you _awake_.

[Sidenote: PUTTING OFF WORK]

_Don't_ put off that long piece of _written work_ till the night before
it is due. A piece of work about which you have been warned months
beforehand, can't be done between 8 p.m. and 3 a.m. Here "_rush
orders_," contrary to the rule, spoil. If you come up to the scratch as
you should, in the matter of long pieces of written work, the Instructor
will almost forget how _dog-goned lazy_ you have been all along in the
little things.

[Sidenote: IDLING]

_Don't idle_ away time to such an extent that you get a reputation as an
idler, either among your friends, or with the members of the Faculty.
You'll find such a reputation hard to _live down_. Notwithstanding the
fact that everybody is _supposed_ to come by a love of Learning in
College, there are some things which the Faculty will _not_ take for
granted. With the Faculty, the chronic idler will find that his name is
_anathema_, or _Dennis_ at least.

[Sidenote: THE DESCENT TO AVERNUS]

_Don't_ fail to keep in mind the flight of steps which represents the
_descent_ from the plane of regular work. It goes something like this:
_work_, _slack work_, _probation_, _special probation_, then, "I am
sorry to inform you that the Faculty has decided that you are no longer
needed to ornament the College," etc. After which, it is the
greased-slide, _down and out_, so to speak. In other words, you are
about to feel the thrill of Academic life along your keel for the last
time. _Facilis descensus Averni_: Avernus being the cold, cold world,
and the bother of having to explain to one's relations and friends in
the home town _how it all happened_.

[Illustration: DONT FAIL TO KEEP IN MIND THE STEPS OF _DESCENT_]

[Sidenote: THE COLLEGE OFFICE]

_Don't_ show disrespect or contempt for the _College Dean_, or for the
retinue within his gates. Once you "queer" yourself with the _College
Office_, you are on dangerous footing, and the _College Degree_ you seek
is no longer seen to be "constant as the _northern star_." Keep the
Degree in mind; _hitch your wagon_ to it. But don't get _too_ ambitious
in the way of Degrees. We once heard of a fellow who was called up and
given the _Third Degree_ by the Faculty, without ever being graduated.




AS TO COLLEGE ORGANIZATIONS AND FRIENDS


[Sidenote: TRYING FOR THINGS]

DON'T hesitate to go out for _any teams_ or _papers_ or _musical clubs_
which you think you'd like to make. The mere _trying for things_ shows
you're not a _dead one_. If you are good enough, you'll find these
things mean more than you ever had thought they could; if you fail to
make them, you'll never regret having tried. As you grow older, you will
see that you _never_ could have done certain things you thought you
could, and you'll have a first-rate opinion of your former self and your
ambition.

[Sidenote: SORTING OUT YOUR INTERESTS]

_Don't_ be surprised or disappointed, if you find you have neither time
nor inclination to keep up with everything you thought you would, when
first coming to College. Your interests naturally needed a _sorting
out_.

[Sidenote: ONE WAY _NOT_ TO MAKE A TEAM]

_Don't_ think that offering suggestions to an athletic _Coach_ is the
way to _make a team_. And don't answer back if the _Coach_ speaks
harshly to you; be thankful for _any_ of his attention, even if it be
gruff. With some Coaches, swearing is more than a liberal art; many
think that the oftener they send their men to _Hell_ during practice,
the surer they are of sending them to _Victory_ in the contest.

[Sidenote: ABOUT SOCIAL CLUBS]

_Don't_, for Heaven's sake, ask people how one ought to go about getting
into _Social clubs_. It isn't considered polite. Just _why_, I can't
tell you; but you'll _learn why_, some day, if you are the _right
sort_.

[Sidenote: ACQUAINTANCES AND FRIENDS]

_Don't_ hesitate to accept all chances for _making friends_, especially
among your Class. Don't think that you can always control the making of
friends; you _can't_. Friends are _Heaven-sent_. Hold the ones you make,
and count yourself lucky if you make half a dozen _very_ good friends
your first year. There is a difference between _acquaintances_ and
_friends_, by the way, just as there is a difference between fellows to
whom you'd casually offer a cigarette and those to whom you'd gladly
offer your pocket-book.

[Sidenote: USELESS PREJUDICE]

_Don't_ rely too much on _prejudice_ in deciding what certain fellows
may or may not be good for. You _may or may not_ be right. _Your_
standard may or may not be the only small stone on the seashore.

[Illustration: DONT ANSWER BACK IF THE COACH _SPEAKS HARSHLY_ TO YOU]

[Sidenote: ABOUT VISITING]

_Don't_ invite everybody you meet to your room. It doesn't pay. But make
a point of _accepting_ as many invitations as possible which come from
men you like. Visit any upper-classman who takes the trouble to offer
you his hospitality. It may help you to _get on_, later.

[Sidenote: THAT HAND-SHAKE]

_Don't_ shake hands like a clam. The _flipper-shake_ is not popular, and
may make you distrusted. You'll need a good _hand-shake_ all through
College.

[Sidenote: THE WOMAN QUESTION: THE QUESTIONABLE]

_Don't_ be one of those who continually pick up anything on the street
that wears a bonnet and high heels. There are lots of girls who are
willing, at any time, to be seen with a College man. _The varieties
differ_. Some are genuinely pretty; others wear the deliberate as
distinguished from the natural complexion, being perhaps not so well
preserved as carefully preserved. Maybe you think it is great fun to
take a partner into the small hotel dining-room with an
"I-do-this-every-evening" kind of air. But you _may_ find out, after
smoking your brandy and drinking your cigarettes, that it _isn't_
pleasant to be played for a "_good thing_."

[Sidenote: THE UNQUESTIONABLE]

_Don't_, however, neglect any opportunity to meet ladies of your own
station. You are _sure_ to require their society from time to time. The
Monastic life is not profitable for a man at College. The _purr of
pretty women_ and the occasional exchange of _amicable nothings_ will
preserve your social soul and keep the little _blood-pumping organ_ in
good condition.

[Sidenote: THE ART OF SHUTTING UP]

_Don't_ hesitate to hear other people's opinions. The World did not
begin, nor will it end, with _you_.

[Sidenote: WHERE SUCCESS FAILS]

_Don't strut_ or _look patronizing_, if you happen to have success; it
makes people feel sorry for you.

[Sidenote: THE LITTLE THINGS]

_Don't_ forget the _little_ things; fellows notice them. Some will even
judge you by the way you give or receive a match or cigarette.

[Sidenote: SUMMING UP THE CLUB PROBLEM]

_Don't_ imagine that your entire success in College will be finally
measured by the number of Clubs you make during your first year. Always
remember, that it is the standing of the ones you identify yourself with
which counts. Don't join _any_ final Club or Society until you _feel
pretty sure_ you could not do _better_.




AS TO THINGS IN GENERAL


[Sidenote: SAVING AND WASTING]

DON'T expect to lay up a bank account by what you save from living
inside your allowance. There are lots of unexpected things coming up
which cost money. Only be careful and choose the things that seem
necessary. You can't _save_ much money; but you don't have to _waste_ a
cent to live and be a gentleman.

[Sidenote: WRITING HOME]

_Don't_ forget to _write home_ once every so often. Mama and Papa are
always glad to see the College-town postmark; and, like as not, Papa is
paying your way through College. Think how you'd feel, if he forgot,
sometimes, to send that _check_!

[Sidenote: WHEN FATHER COMES TO TOWN]

_Don't_ treat _Father_ or _Uncle John_ shabbily if one of them happens
in town unexpectedly. Maybe _you'll_ have a son or a nephew in the old
place one day; and then _you'll_ like to take a run out, once in a
while, and see how things are getting on.

[Sidenote: SHOWING OFF AT HOME]

_Don't_ swagger when you go _home_ for your first Thanksgiving or
Christmas vacation. It doesn't make your friends envious of you. It's
apt to make them _sore_.

[Sidenote: RUNNING BILLS]

_Don't_ think that because you can charge things at almost any store in
the College Town, it is your duty to have your name on the books of
_every_ firm. You don't need to back _every_ enterprise; besides, most
every firm has a habit of rendering monthly bills, and a few of these
make even a _fair allowance_ look washed out and _faded_.

[Sidenote: THAT AUTOMOBILE]

_Don't_ think that it is your Father's duty to present you with an
_automobile_. In Father's day, it was _possible_ for a boy to go through
College without one of these things. Remember that it cost a few pence
to repair them and run them;--or rather run them and then repair them;
and Father's twenty years in business have taught him a _few_ things.
Many a father would as soon buy his son an auto, but is not willing to
_endow_ one.

[Sidenote: ABOUT PAWNING YOUR WATCH]

_Don't_ pawn your watch or sleeve-links during your first year. This
privilege is limited to upper-classmen who do Society. A pawn-ticket is
a _very_ compromising thing if found by some of your close relatives.
You don't know what it is? It is a thin slip of paper somewhat
resembling a check; only it weighs _more heavily on the mind_. No matter
_how_ funny a story you make at home of pawning your Grandfather's
watch, the heads of the family _never_ see the joke. When you rake in
the price of exchange for your pawned watch, it seems just like
_finding_ money, _but_ when you pay it back out of a slim allowance at
the end of the month, it seems like _losing_ the same amount, _plus_.

[Illustration: DONT PAWN YOUR WATCH DURING YOUR FIRST YEAR]

[Sidenote: GETTING HOOKED ON]

_Don't_ buy _cigars_ in _wholesale_ quantities from mysterious-looking
foreigners, who say they have just done a neat little job of smuggling
from Havana, and are willing to let you in on a _good_ thing. They may
even flatter you by telling you that _you_ look trustworthy. They really
mean that you look easy. It's _your_ move.

[Sidenote: BEGGARS]

_Don't_ give money to able-bodied beggars. Some may even speak good
French or German. If you happen to be taking French or German, you will
imagine that _you_ are the _only_ one in the world who can help them.
But don't yield. As for crippled or blind and deaf beggars, help them
now and then. You don't have to listen to their reminiscences of _Life
in a Saw-mill_ to do this, unless you care for that sort of thing.

[Sidenote: QUESTIONS OF CONSCIENCE--YOUR OWN BUSINESS]

_Don't_ kill your _conscience_ in regard to matters which you have been
brought up to see in certain definite lights. If you think playing cards
for money and the drinking of beer wrong, then _don't_ play and _don't_
indulge. You'll never be thought less of in College for hanging on to
principle. Just be sure that your principles are _worth_ sticking up
for, and then _stick_. A wise old Englishman puts it this way: "Obey
your conscience; but just be _sure_ that your conscience is not that of
an _ass_."

[Illustration: THE 52 PASTEBOARDS]

_Don't_ get into the _little game_ too often. Under certain conditions
it's as easy as rolling off the decalogue. Sometimes you get in because
you're afraid others will think you are afraid to play. This is really
not courage. A word more: when you're in, often the time when you
_think_ you can't afford to stop is just the time when you _can_ best
afford it. Take this advice; it is better than that of _R. E. Morse_.

[Sidenote: SPENDING MONEY]

_Don't_ keep _spending money_ for a lot of things that you would hardly
care to itemize in the account you send to Father. Remember how he said,
"I'll keep you decently, only I don't want College to make only a sport
of my boy." Sometimes, when you are pressed, you think of asking Father
to lend you money to be _paid back_ with interest, when you get _older_.
Don't be surprised if he refuses and asks, "_Where's_ your collateral?"
Remember that the Business World, hunting about for something to which
to attach its respect and admiration, does _not_ single out the
_Undergraduate_ in _College_.

[Sidenote: EARNING MONEY]

_Don't_ be ashamed of chances to _earn money_ in College, if you need
it. More fellows earn their way through College than you have any idea
of. College men have _lots_ of respect for a fellow who isn't ashamed to
_work_.

[Sidenote: THE DEAD GAME ACT]

_Don't_ be a Sport or a Snob. Either is fatal. The _dead game act_ plays
itself out sooner than those who work it suppose, and serves oftener to
_point a weakness_ than _adorn a virtue_.

[Sidenote: IMITATING]

_Don't imitate_ the manner of some one else. When you try to be _like
some one else_, you only succeed in being _unlike yourself_. People
don't expect or want you to be like them.

[Sidenote: THE FANCY INCOME POSE]

_Don't_ pretend that you have a _fancy income_, if you haven't. It's a
cheap, expensive pose. Lots of fellows get money regularly from home.
All they have to do, it would seem, is to rip open letters and sign
their names on the back of what falls out. If you _aren't_ in this
class, don't _pretend_ you are. It isn't _how much_ money you've got,
but _how you make what you've got do_, that shows you up a good one.

[Sidenote: THAT BANK ACCOUNT]

_Don't_ fail to keep one eye on that _bank account_. It _slowly_ and
_surely_ dwindles. It needs watching especially, about the time the elms
put on their new leaves, and the undergraduates their new flannel
trousers. To end the year with an over-drawn bank account is risky. No
fellow can afford to have his _credit_ go _below_ par.

[Sidenote: EXERCISE]

_Don't_ neglect the _health_ habit. Substitute the tennis racquet for
the cigarette, one of these days, and note the _difference_. It may
make you feel like a _King_ in the _pink_ of condition; after which
you'll probably try it again, which won't hurt you a bit.

[Sidenote: JOKES]

_Don't_ repeat _all_ the _jokes_ that come into your head. Avoid
especially jokes that may be old. Many a fellow's popularity may hinge
on the fact that he'll _listen_ to a funny story without insisting on
telling another that isn't _quite_ so funny.

[Sidenote: SHOWING OFF]

_Don't_, if you are from a large well-to-do Preparatory School, talk too
much about it, or think that the College must be run on the _same plan_
as your school. Your views may not be _appreciated_.

[Sidenote: SWAGGERING]

_Don't_ aspire to be taken for an upper-classman by cultivating a walk
or a _swagger_ or an _air_. You can work this _so_ hard, that finally
you are the only one deceived.

[Sidenote: ROWDYISM]

_Don't_ be rowdyish, or _get the reputation_ of being a drunken fellow.
The _real_ fun you get out of _College_ need not be a continual round of
batting.

[Sidenote: ABOUT BEING SNUBBED]

_Don't_ think it is always entirely the _other_ man's fault if he fails
to speak to you. If you have not the ability to make an impression worth
another's remembering, _look to yourself_.

[Sidenote: COLLEGE HABITS]

_Don't_ be a _fool_. This is the sum and the substance of all that
herein precedes. A fellow shows himself a fool or not a fool by his
_habits_. _College habits_ are funny things. The sooner you form your
College habits the _better_,--or _worse_. To put off the sensible
resolve till the time of your last exam may be as useless as the call of
the _doctor_ after the _minister_ has left.

[Sidenote: ABOUT BEING THE ASS]

_Don't_ imagine for a moment that coming to _College_ enables you to
act in a superior way to others who have not enjoyed the same privilege.
A _College_ career is a grand, good thing; but its _object_ is to enable
you, if possible, better to _understand_ the World, not to _lift_ you at
all above it. The World hates a fool; but a _College-bred fool_, it
thoroughly despises. Don't let your ears grow long, and don't bray.

[Sidenote: ABOUT BEING A GENTLEMAN]

_Don't_ imagine that the _College Catalogue_, or even _this book_, can
tell you _all_ the things you need to know concerning how to make a man
of yourself. After all, its really _up to you_. Look about, and be a
gentleman. You say, "But these few remarks hardly _begin_ to solve the
problem." And echo answers, "_VERBUM SAP_."




     HERE ENDS THE COLLEGE FRESHMAN'S DON'T BOOK BY G. F. E. (A. B.)
     A SYMPATHIZER. DECORATIONS AND INITIALS BY RAYMOND CARTER
     ILLUSTRATIONS BY CHARLES FRANK INGERSON PUBLISHED BY PAUL ELDER
     & COMPANY AND PRINTED FOR THEM BY THE TOMOYE PRESS UNDER THE
     DIRECTION OF J. H. NASH IN THE CITY OF SAN FRANCISCO DURING THE
     MONTH OF MAY AND YEAR NINETEEN HUNDRED & TEN

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

All of the illustration captions omit the apostrophe in the word
"DON'T." This was retained. All other punctuation was corrected if
wrong.

Page 9, "you" changed to "your" (your trunk is still)

Page 19, repeated word "to" deleted from text. Original read (liable to
_to fall down..._)

Page 29, "varities" changed to "varieties" (The varieties differ)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The College Freshman's Don't Book, by 
George Fullerton Evans

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COLLEGE FRESHMAN'S DON'T BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 42467.txt or 42467.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/4/6/42467/

Produced by Henry Flower, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
