The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari, January
12th, 1895, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Punch, or the London Charivari, January 12th, 1895

Author: Various

Editor: Sir Francis Burnand

Release Date: April 7, 2013 [EBook #42478]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH, JANUARY 12TH, 1895 ***




Produced by Malcolm Farmer, Lesley Halamek and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





       *       *       *       *       *

PUNCH, OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI.

VOL. 108, JANUARY 12, 1895.

_edited by Sir Francis Burnand_

       *       *       *       *       *




TALL TALES OF SPORT AND ADVENTURE.

(_By Mr. Punch's own Short Story-teller._)

INTRODUCTION.

Not many living men, and even fewer in the ages that are past,
have--if I may use the word--sported with greater assiduity and
success than I have during a life which is even now little past its
middle period. At one time on horseback, at another on the bounding
and impulsive elephant; now bestriding the matchless dromedary on his
native prairie, now posted on foot in a jungle crowded with golden
pheasants in all the native splendour of their plumage; sometimes
matching my solitary craft against a host of foxes on the swelling
uplands of Leicestershire, sometimes facing the Calydonian boar or the
sanguinary panther in their woodland lairs, dealing showers of leaden
death from a hundred tubes, or tracking my fearful prey by the lonely
light of a wax vesta and despatching it at midnight with my trusty
bowie--wherever there were leagues to be walked, risks to be run,
or fastnesses to be rushed there not only have I been the first, but
(paradoxical as it may appear) there also have I succeeded and have
never been successfully followed. My experiences are therefore unique,
and it is in the hope that they may to some extent profit a younger
generation, less inured, I fear, to hardship and danger than my own,
that I now set pen to paper and recount some of the exploits that have
made my name famous wherever sport is loved and true sportsmen are
revered.

A less modest man might have said more, but one whose deeds speak
for him in every quarter of the world may well be content to leave to
punier men the ridiculous trumpeting braggadocio that too often makes
so-called sportsmen the laughing stock of society. For myself, I can
never forget the lesson I learned at an early age from my dear father,
himself a shikari of no common order, though to be sure, as he himself
would be the first to admit if he were alive, the exploits of the son
(I had no brothers) have now thrust the parental performances into
the background. Still, it was my father who first inculcated upon my
infant mind the daring, the ignorance of fear, the contempt of danger,
and the iron endurance which have since made me a household word.
Heaven rest the old man! He sleeps his last sleep far away in the
Desert of Golden Sand, with no head-stone to mark his resting-place,
and neither the roaring of his old enemies the tigers, nor the
bellowing of the countless alligators who infest the spot can rouse
him any more. Alas! it was trustfulness that destroyed him. He was
gored to death by a favourite rhinoceros that he had rescued at a
tender age when its mother was killed, and had brought up to know and,
as he thought, to love him. But I have always thought myself that the
rhinoceros was a treacherous brute, and though I have often been
asked to tame one, for presentation to this or that Emperor, I have
consistently declined.

Marvellous, however, as my father was in his day for his exploits and
his variegated bags of game, he was perhaps even more wonderful for
the unswerving accuracy with which he was accustomed to relate his
adventures. Far and wide over the steppes of Central Asia, the burning
regions of equatorial Africa, the precipitous haunts of the
American Grizzly, and the wild retreats of the ferocious Albanian
pig--everywhere, in short, where he had set foot or drawn trigger,
this peculiarity of his was known and appreciated, and many a
respectful _sobriquet_ did it earn for him from the savage tribes
amongst whom he spent the best years of his life. In Kashmir he was
known as _Peili Ton_, that is, the man who cannot lie; amongst the
swarthy Zambesians the name of _Govun Bettir_ (the Undefeated and
Veracious Man) was a name to conjure with even when in their moments
of warlike passion the tribesmen rushed madly through their primeval
thickets, shouting their terrible war-cry, "_Itzup ures Leeve_," that
is, "Death to the white-faced robbers."

[Illustration: "He had indeed seen ten bocks."]

But what I wished specially to relate about my poor father was the
lesson of truthfulness which he inculcated upon me at an early age. He
and I (I was then but a lad of twelve) had been hunting the ferocious
Pilsener gemsbock through the wild Lagerland in which he makes his
home. It happened one morning that we had parted company. To me was
assigned the duty of beating through the Bier-Wald, the dense forest
which stretches mile upon mile in unbroken gloom to the confines of
the Boose-See. The Fates were propitious. Wherever I turned I saw
a victim, and one after another I brought down with unerring aim
twenty-four (as I thought) of these noble animals, whose horns are
now worth a king's ransom, and might, even in those distant days, have
rescued a minor German Prince from captivity. Hastening home with
my booty loaded upon my back--I was a strong boy for my age, but of
course nothing to what I have since become--I met my dear father just
as I reached the door of the hut which served us for hunting quarters.
Joyously I cast down my burden, and sprang to his side. But my father
wore an expression of annoyance, and I soon discovered that the luck
had been against him. He had indeed seen ten bocks, but for some
reason his aim had lacked its accustomed deadliness, and he had come
back empty-handed. I condoled with him in a boy's artless fashion, and
proceeded to tell him how fortunate I had been.

"How many have you shot?" he asked me.

"Twenty-four," was my reply.

"Count them," said my father.

I did so, and you may judge of my astonishment when I found that
twenty-six had fallen to my gun. I counted again and again. Yes, there
were twenty-six of them. With one of my shots I must have brought down
three. In the agitation of the moment I had overlooked this. I told
my father that I had made a slight mistake, and endeavoured to explain
how it had arisen. But my father was inexorable.

"A lie," he said, "is a lie. You said you had shot twenty-four, you
have actually killed twenty-six. You must suffer."

Over the rest of the painful scene I draw a veil. The shrieks of my
mother, who implored pardon for me on her bended knees, still seem to
ring in my ears. Since that time I have always respected not only
the strict truth, but also the leather thongs which are in use in the
Lagerland for the droves of untameable cattle that roam the prairies.
This was my lesson, and I have never, never forgotten it.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO AN OLD FLAME.--(TWENTY YEARS AFTER.)

  A little girl, a charming tiny tot,
    I well remember you with many a curl,
  Although I recollect you said, "I'm not
              A _little_ girl."

  We parted. Mid the worry and the whirl
    Of life, again, alas! I saw you not.
  I kept you in my memory as a pearl
    Of winsome childhood. So imagine what
  A shock it was this morning to unfurl
    My morning paper, there to see you've got
              A little girl!

       *       *       *       *       *

SOMETHING TO LIVE FOR.--The _Pall Mall Gazette_ announced last Friday
that "a bevy of head-masters will appear in the pulpit of St. Paul's
this month." How many go to a "bevy" we are not aware, though perhaps
we might ascertain it from Sir DRURIOLANUS, who could inform us, after
several crowded houses, how many go to see the "bevy," and how many
combine to make up a "bevy," of ballet beauties in the pantomime; but
putting it say at a dozen, the bevy of head-masters in their caps and
gowns would find the pulpit of St. Paul's rather a tight fit. Pretty
sight though, anyway.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: HARLEQUIN HARCOURT, THE SLEEPING BEAUTY, AND THE
FINANCIAL FAIRY PRINCE.--(_See "New Year's Day Dream."_)]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A HEAVY RESPONSIBILITY.

(_Hounds going from Covert to Covert._)

_Master Jack_ (_to M.F.H._). "I SAY, YOU KNOW, AWFUL NUISANCE THE WAY
THESE WOMEN FOLLOW A FELLOW OVER _EVERYTHING!_ MAKES A MAN HAVE TO BE
SO BEASTLY CAREFUL WHAT HE _JUMPS_, DON'T YOU KNOW!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE NEW YEAR'S DAY DREAM.

    _A Tennysonian Fragment from the Popular Pantomime of
    "Harlequin Harcourt, the Sleeping Beauty, and the Financial
    Fairy Prince."_

    ["The Revenue Returns," says the _Daily News_, "for the
    expired three quarters of the financial year show that a sum
    of close upon L62,000,000 has been paid into the Exchequer.
    The CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER'S estimated revenue for the
    whole year was a little over L94,000,000. This is regarded as
    an indication of the revival of trade, and the promise of a
    substantial surplus for the next Budget."]

THE ARRIVAL.

  All blessed boons, though coming late,
    To those who wait them issue forth,
  For skill in sequel works with fate,
    And draws the veil from hidden worth.
  He comes, great keeper of our tin,
    He is no Tory _Hurlo-Thrumbo!_
  A fairy Prince, with triple chin,
    And heavy-footed as poor _Jumbo!_

  He comes, scarce knowing what he seeks,
    Though he has heard of Sleeping Beauties.
  He hath been dreaming many weeks
    Of Income Tax, Stamps, and Death Duties.
  He'd charmed the party with his talk
    Of Graduation; now grey fear
  Knocks at his ribs, his cheek's like chalk,
    With thoughts of Revenue for the Year.

  More close and close his footsteps wind,
    The next year's Budget on his heart.
  From Stamps and Liquor will he find
    Big plums? Will rich taxpayers "part"?
  Here's sleeping Trade! "Lor! what a lark!"
    He thinks. "To wake her--were a spree!
  A kiss _may_ lift those lashes dark;
    She can't resist a buss--from Me!"

THE REVIVAL.

  A touch, a smack! A boxed ear.
    There came the sound of a smart slap.
  The Fairy Prince, with cry of fear,
    His hand unto his cheek did clap.
  The Sleeping Beauty gave a gape,
    A wide-mouthed yawn, a long-drawn stretch.
  _He_ rubbed his chins. "This _is_ a jape!
    I _knew_ my style the girl would fetch!

  "In spite of all that WILSON says,[*]
    I trust those Revenue Returns.
  She _does_ revive! Be mine the praise!
    By Jove, though, how my left ear burns!
  I told 'em that I'd do the trick
    With my new fakement, the Death Duties.
  Come, Miss, wake up! Revive, dear, quick!
    You sleepiest of Sleeping Beauties!"

  At last sweet slumbering Trade awoke,
    And on her couch her form upreared.
  The Prince smiled, rubbed his chins, and spoke.
    "Ah, WILSON'S prophecy is queered.
  He swore that you would _not_ revive,
    In his Cassandra-like Review,
  But don't sit yawning! Look alive!
    Or men will swear I've humbugged you!"

  "All right!" said sleepy Trade. "But still
    My joints feel somewhat stiff or so.
  Say, have you passed that Irish Bill
    You schemed--_how_ long was it ago?"
  The Chancellor subdued a curse,
    Which scarce would serve for a reply,
  But dallied with his well-filled purse,
    And smiling, put the question by.

[Footnote: * In a pessimistic editorial article, opening the new
volume of the _Investor's Review_.]

       *       *       *       *       *

A TALL ORDER.

    ["The Emperor WILLIAM is to have the Grand Order of the
    Imperial Chrysanthemum (the Japanese Garter) to add to his
    collection, 'in recognition of the services rendered by German
    officers to Japanese officers in instructing them in military
    and naval science.'"--_Daily Chronicle._]

  Oh, the Fatherland, the happy Fatherland,
    With fresh happiness will hum,
  When their Emperor shall the Order wear
    Of the Jap Chry-san-the-mum!
  He's "a daisy" now, as the world doth know;
    But, oh! _won't_ he be thrice happy,
  When he sports the badge of the Golden Flower
    Of the cute and grateful Jappy?
  If JOHN CHINAMAN in the little Jap
    Has most surely caught a Tartar,
  Jap learned to war 'neath the Teuton Star,
    So will send him the Jap "Garter."
  BULL has given him tips, and has built him ships,
    But the Jap don't badge J. B.
  No! Peace and War, like most other things,
    Are now "made in Ger-ma-ny"!

       *       *       *       *       *

"SENTIMENT" FOR OLD-FASHIONED PLAY-GOERS.--"May that confounded 'Woman
with a Past,' who monopolises the Present, have no Future!"

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A WINTER'S TALE.

_Benevolent Person_ (_recognising an old protege_). "ROGERS, I'M SORRY
TO SEE YOU IN THIS CONDITION! I UNDERSTOOD YOU HAD TAKEN THE PLEDGE!"

_Rogers._ "YOU'RE QUI' RI', SIR. ONLY Y' SEE THE WATER'S FROZEN 'T THE
MAIN DOWN OUR STREET!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

THAT PRECIOUS DONKEY!

(_An Episode in the Life of A. Briefless, Junior, Esq.,
Barrister-at-Law, in Three Parts._)

PART I.--_The Coming into Possession of the Donkey._

"Yes, Sir," said my excellent and admirable clerk, PORTINGTON, "he
came here three times, about a month ago. We thought he was mad, so
would not let him in. But the third time he left that parcel and that
letter. You see, Sir, they are tied together, and as there was a bomb
scare on at the time, we did not touch them. That's how it comes, Sir,
that you have not had them earlier."

I must confess I was a little annoyed. I frequently absent myself from
Pump-Handle Court for days and even weeks together, and then I expect
my clerical (I use the adjective in its non-ecclesiastical sense)
representative to forward my correspondence.

"It cannot be helped, PORTINGTON," I replied; "all I care for are the
interests of my clients. If the visitor was one anxious to lay
his case before me, I can only trust he has not suffered by my
unpremeditated absence."

"I do not think he will have to complain of that, Sir. And as to his
case, we don't know whether it is one; none of us like to touch the
parcel, lest it should go off."

"You mean with a report--it must get reported," I suggested, with a
smile. I allow myself a little frolicsome levity at Yuletide. "Well,
where is it?"

"In your room, Sir," and PORTINGTON led the way to my special
apartment.

I found my chamber tenanted by a miscellaneous collection of articles.
Truth to tell I do not use my rooms very frequently, and consequently
it has become a sort of a proverb amongst my co-parceners in
Pump-Handle Court, _a propos_ of anything of a cumbersome character,
"When in doubt, put it into BRIEFLESS'S cupboard." Not that I really
occupy a cupboard; my room (I lay the emphasis on the word) is far
more commodious than the largest specimen of those receptacles.
Consequently, I was not altogether surprised to find collected
together a banjo-case, some curtain rods, a number of framed pictures,
and a damaged bicycle. In the centre of the room was an oblong parcel,
to which was tied an envelope, doubtless containing an enclosure.

With some slight trepidation--I had no wish to accompany Pump-Handle
Court to the skies--I opened the letter. It ran as follows:--

"To A. BRIEFLESS, JUNIOR, ESQ.--Dear and Honoured Sir,--I have long
desired to show you some token of goodwill. I have frequently read
your contributions to the leading legal paper of the day (I refer,
of course, to the _London Charivari_), and have been filled with
admiration at the clearness of your style and the depth of your
knowledge of what may be termed the duplex action of the human heart.
As I happen to be Emperor of CHINA I write anonymously. I have been
ruined by law and the lawyers. You have never represented me or
opposed me. For this I am very, very grateful, and beg you to accept
the accompanying present. It is a ---- But hush, we are observed."

And at this point the document abruptly terminated. I read the letter
to PORTINGTON, and asked his opinion upon it. He replied abruptly he
"considered the writer a lunatic."

"Well, no, I do not think we can go quite so far as that," I observed.
"You see, he seems to have some appreciation of my talents. He may be
a trifle eccentric, but I fancy nothing worse."

Encouraged by this belief in the sanity of my semi-anonymous (I use
the epithet advisedly, as I take it that the incidental claim to the
throne of the Celestial Empire was not urged seriously) correspondent,
I opened the package. The brown paper unwound and a picture was
revealed to us. It had evidently been painted for many years. The
frame (which, in PORTINGTON'S opinion, was the best portion of the
structure) was distinctly old-fashioned. The gilding was tarnished and
the woodwork out of repair.

"What is the subject?" I asked, after three or four minutes' close
inspection.

"I think, Sir," replied my excellent and admirable clerk, "that it's
something to do with a donkey."

PORTINGTON was right. On closer investigation the painting revealed
itself to be the representation of a cottage in the snow, with some
villagers drawing water from a half-frozen pond in the neighbourhood
of a rather intelligent donkey, who was watching their proceedings
with languid interest.

"Certainly it is a donkey," I exclaimed; "and, to my thinking, a very
fine one."

"What shall we do with it, Sir?" asked PORTINGTON. "It's no good here;
shall I give it to the dustman? He would take it away if we asked
him."

For a moment I thought my clerical (I use the adjective in its
non-ecclesiastical sense) representative was indulging in jocularity.
I found I was in error. PORTINGTON was absolutely serious.

"You evidently do not know the value of some of these old frames. Of
course I shall take the picture with me to my private residence."

I carried out my intention. The canvas presentment of the donkey and
accessories was carefully conveyed in a four-wheeler to Justinian
Gardens, where I have rented for some years a very pleasant house.
The lady who has honoured me by taking my name, and whom in my more
playful humour I sportively term my "better seven-eighths," received
me.

"I hope you have brought the music from the Stores," said the lady,
after our first greetings. "I suppose that package came from Victoria
Street?"

"No, my precious one," I replied; I sometimes use terms of endearment
to the members of my domestic circle. "It is a picture given to me by
a grateful client."

"Client!" she exclaimed; "and a grateful one! What a find! But why
bring it here? Haven't we already more pictures than we want? Why at
this moment there's half-a-dozen of extra plates from the Christmas
numbers that you _would_ have framed, waiting to be hung."

"But this, my love, is an oil-painting, with what I judge to be a very
valuable old-fashioned frame."

By this time my present was revealed.

"Why, it's only the picture of a donkey!" exclaimed my better
seven-eighths, with a laugh. "We really don't want that sort of thing
in the hall or reception rooms."

"But it is really very fine!" I urged. "Look at the handling of that
donkey's ears. And the frame, too, is simply magnificent."

"I don't so much mind the frame. We might take out the picture and put
in '_The Arrival of the Boulogne Boat_,' the Christmas supplement to
the _Young Lady's Boudoir_, in its stead. And yet it is just as likely
as not to spoil it. No, I think we had better put picture and frame in
the box-room."

"But my dear," I remonstrated; "this may be a very valuable picture.
The head of the donkey is quite remarkable and ----"

"Now do we want portraits of donkeys about the house? The boxroom or
the dust-hole is the proper place for them."

"I know you objected to my own likeness--you see the connection with
the donkey, dear?" I sometimes make rather humorous remarks during the
continuance of the festive season.

"Don't be silly! But this hideous thing should really go into the
box-room." And so it went. Perhaps on a future occasion I may trace
the further adventures of my grateful client's gift. In my poor
judgment they are distinctly interesting and instructive.

       *       *       *       *       *

A DREAM OF THE NEW WOMAN.

  She dreamed the doom that Fate pronounces
    Against the woman ceased to be,
  She dreamed her brain weighed three more ounces,
    And was of finer quality.

  Her iron nerves all fear derided,
    She saw a mouse, but did not run.
  With pockets she was well provided,
    And she could fire a Maxim gun.

  She had abjured each female folly,
    Hygienic dress she always wore,
  With stern, determined melancholy
    The universe she pondered o'er.

  Of man in all respects the equal,
    At last her heart's desire was hers.
  Only, like every other sequel,
    Her sequel proved a touch perverse.

  She sighed, "My mind with facts is loaded,
    No golden vision it retains.
  Even Nirvana is exploded,
    And, save the Atom, nought remains!

  "Each ray of light a mental prism
    Must needs determine and arrest.
  My life is one long syllogism,
    Without a parenthetic jest.

  "I who was wont to kneel revering,
    In manly chivalry confide,
  Am all alone my vessel steering--
    And yet I am unsatisfied!

  "The gingerbread has lost its gilding
    That from afar appeared sublime.
  I for eternity am building--
    'Twas not amiss to build for time!

  "The pilgrimage was long and painful,
    Cheerless and cold the heights I win--
  About me hangs a shadow baneful
    Of that Eternal Feminine.

  "Alas, I have not learned my lesson!
    I feel a frantic, mad despair.
  I'd like to put an evening dress on,
    And many roses in my hair!

  "My heart desires the old romances,
    The fictions dear all facts above,
  The flowers, the ices, and the dances,
    The days of youth, the days of--Love.

  "That giddy whirl, that senseless splendour,
    Was dear, although I said it bored,
  Agnosticism I'd surrender
    Once, once again, to be adored!

  "I wished my brain had three more ounces,
    For them I bartered happiness;
  My heart the new _regime_ denounces,
    I wish it had three ounces less!"

  She woke. A subtle sense pervaded
    Her mind of being someone great;
  But very speedily it faded,
    Her brain regained its normal state.

  She said: "I'd beat them all at college
    If I could have those ounces back;
  Only--I should not like my knowledge
    To make me cleverer than--JACK!"

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: MARK TAPLEY REDIVIVUS.

"CH-CH-K-K-KKKKK-N-N-NICE S-S-S-SEASONABLE WEATHER THIS,
MATE--K-K-KKK!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

ODYLLIC FORCE.

(_Vide "Daily Graphic" passim._)

  Odyllic Force! O mystic power divine!
    O greater than magician's might!--of course
  You know the virtues of this gift of mine,
                    Odyllic Force!

  I can command the vasty deep. I say
    Unto the elemental storm--"Be still!"
  It may be that the sea will not obey,
  But what of that? Deny it if ye may,
  Still I command; still, still by night and day
    Despite all scorn, I exercise my will
  And on the troubled surface of the main
    Fresh from my soul, fresh from its limpid source,
  I pour my subtle influence--I rain
                    Odyllic Force.

  I say unto the weather--"Be thou fine!"
    And straightway, if it be not foul, 'tis fair.
  Nay, at my word the very sun will shine
    If it should haply chance no clouds are there.
  And should the temperature not fall below
    The freezing point, until the twenty-first
  Frost shall be all unknown, and ice and snow,
  And plumbers; and the taps shall freely flow,
  Nor shall the leaden pipes presume to show
    The shadow of a tendency to burst.
  Nay, if the weather be not somewhat cold
  It shall be warm. The budding gems of gold,
  Should they appear, we shortly may behold,
    Flashing amid the prickles of the gorse.
  So for the good of man, and beast, and flower
  I diligently use my mystic power,
  And ever exercise from hour to hour;
                    Odyllic Force.

  Thus do the elements obey my call.
    Thus do I influence the Seasons' course
  Thus do I exercise for great and small,
  The king, the lord, the beggar, one and all,
                    Odyllic Force.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: ! ! ! ! !

_Lily_ (_from Devonshire, on a visit to her Scotch Cousin Margy in St.
Andrews, N.B._). "WHAT A STRANGE THING FASHION IS, MARGY! FANCY A GAME
LIKE GOLF REACHING UP AS FAR NORTH AS THIS!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

"WHO SAID--'ATROCITIES'?"

OR, "THERE'S LIFE IN THE OLD DOG YET."

    ["It was my fate, my fortune, about, I think, eighteen years
    ago to take an active part with regard to other outrages,
    which first came up in the shape of rumour, but were
    afterwards well verified, in Bulgaria.... Old as I am, my
    feelings have not been deadened in regard to matters of such
    a dreadful description."--_Mr. Gladstone's Birthday Speech
    at Hawarden, December 29, 1894, on the alleged Armenian
    Atrocities._]

  Retirement? Oh, rubbish! Tykes currish or cubbish
    May curl up in kennels, or snug up in straw,
  But dogs of right mettle to rest will not settle,
    While sight's in the eye, and while snap's in the jaw.
  A bed in a basket? Mere mongrels may ask it.
    A couch and a cushion? They're lap-dog delights.
  But pluck and true breeding, such comforts unheeding,
    Desert laps and hearth-rugs for frolics and fights.

  Retired! How rats chortle! Like "_Rab_" the immortal
    This dog scorns dull rest, and is still "rough on rats."
  As always delighting in "plenty o' fechting,"
    He pricks up his ears at a whisper of "s-s-scats!"
  Aslumber and dreaming? Oh, that is mere seeming,
    Curled up tail to muzzle in cosiest sort.
  His hairs are a-bristle at whisper or whistle
    That gives the least promise of scrimmage or sport.

  On rats he's still ruthless! They may think him toothless,
    Those red Turkish rodents who once felt his fangs.
  Ah! eighteen years earlier his coat was much curlier,
    Now white and whispy sparse-scattered it hangs.
  But years though they roughen his hide, seem to toughen
    The muscles and nerves of this rare sporting tyke.
  The rattling old ratter is still game to scatter
    A pitful of vermin, of what breed you like.

  The Istamboul sort are his favourite sport,
    Rabid rodents who raven, red-fanged, in foul hordes,
  Turco sewer-bred legions, who earth's fairest regions
    Would ravage like TAMERLANE'S Tartar-swung swords.
  Terrors untameable, horrors unnameable,
    Mark their maraudings and hang on their track.
  Now in fresh numbers they swarm, whilst he slumbers
    Who once was the plague of the pestilent pack.

  But--_Who said--Atrocities?_ Old animosities
    Wake in his spirit and stir in his blood.
  Eh? What? Retirement? Nay, not if requirement,
    Or prospect of sport, move the old champion's mood.
  His heart has not deadened; his old eyes have reddened
    With love of the fray and the old righteous wrath.
  The varmint old ratter his old foes would scatter.
    "Auld _Rab_" once again will be on the war-path!

       *       *       *       *       *

"BON JOUR, PHILIPPINE!"

  "They grew in beauty side by side,
    They filled one home with glee"--
  Until that evening at dessert
    You passed the nuts to me.
  Then came the "crack of doom," the twins
    No sooner had you seen
  Than, "Oh, what fun!" you said, "we'll have
    A _Bon jour_, PHILIPPINE!"

  "They grew in beauty side by side,
    They filled one home with glee"--
  Until they found respective graves
    Alas! in you and me.
  And then to win a gift next morn
    We vowed with solemn mien,
  Whoe'er should greet the other first
    With "_Bon jour_, PHILIPPINE!"

  "_Bon jour_"--I dreamt of it all night,
    At dawn recalled it yet,
  But clean forgot it whilst I shaved--
    At breakfast then we met.
  I'd only time, I know, to think
    Maid sweeter ne'er was seen,
  When you, with laughter-dancing eyes,
    Cried, "_Bon jour_, PHILIPPINE!"

  And so you won a gift from me,
    And chose that I should write
  These verses, which I've pondered o'er
    For many a sleepless night!
  I'll never crack another nut,
    When you are there, I mean;
  Yet may you greet me often--save
    With "_Bon jour_, PHILIPPINE!"

       *       *       *       *       *

MOTTO FOR MODERN MANAGERS.--The proper study of (theatre-going)
Mankind is--the _New Woman._

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "WHO SAID--'ATROCITIES'?"

(_After the Popular Engraving._)

"OLD AS I AM, MY FEELINGS HAVE NOT BEEN DEADENED IN REGARD TO MATTERS
OF SUCH A DREADFUL DESCRIPTION."--_Mr. Gladstone's Birthday Speech at
Hawarden on the Armenian Atrocities, December 29._]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE VESTRYMAN.

A COMIC SONG FOR SERIOUS CONSIDERATION.

(_By an Elderly Victim of Bumbledom._)

    ["The London Vestries and Boards of Works have not exactly
    covered themselves with glory in their dealings with the
    recent snowfall. In very few neighbourhoods was any attempt
    made on Wednesday to remove the slush, and Nature having
    taking her course during the night, in the direction of a
    frost early yesterday morning, the streets in many places
    were absolutely impassable for wheeled traffic until a liberal
    layer of sand and gravel had been spread."--_Daily Chronicle,
    January 4._]

AIR--"_The Bogie Man._"

  Come, gather round me, ratepayers,
    So full of fun and glee;
  New Bumble's going to play the fool
    To please the L. C. C.
  They swear that he is able
    Improvements for to plan;
  I love to hear Progressives say,
    "Hush! The New Vestryman!"

_Chorus._

  _Slush! Slush!! Slush!!!_
    _Where is_ the Vestryman?
  Are broom and shovel ready?
    What _is_ his brand new plan?
  Oh, Slush! Slush! Slush!--
    The footways never ran
  With a worse slithery slippery slop,
    'Neath the Old Vestryman.

  When I sit down, impromptu,
    All in a soft snow-pie;
  Or slide a yard, then come down hard,
    I groan, and wonder why.
  I blow my blue numb fingers,
    I watch a fast-stuck van;
  Reform, I cry, seems all my eye.
    Where _is_ that Vestryman?

_Chorus._

  _Slush! Slush!! Slush!!!_
    Why _is_ this, Vestryman?
  Is this the outcome shady
    Of the Progressive plan?
  Oh, Slush! Slush! Slush!
    No gravel, sand, or tan!
  All slip and slop. I'd like to _whop_
    That blessed Vestryman!!!

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: GRADATION.

_Clerk_ (_to Curate_). "I'M TERRIBLE SORRY, ZUR, THAT YOU BE AGWAINE
TO LAVE US. WE'VE CHANGED EVER ZO MANY TIMES SINCE PASSEN GREEN DIED,
_AND ALWAYS FOR THE WUSS_!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

TRAVELS IN TAFFY-LAND; OR, WALES BLOWING.

    [The Flint Town Council has censured the L. & N. W. Railway
    for dismissing some of its servants for ignorance of the
    English language.]

Would you tell me, Porter, if the next train is the one for
Aberystwyth?

I am really very much obliged for your reply, but as I have not a
Cymric dictionary at hand, I am totally unable even to guess at your
meaning.

As the man points to the train which is now at the platform, and nods
vigorously, I suppose he means me to get in. Still, the fact that it
has "Llanrhychwyn" on it makes me a little doubtful whether I shall
ever reach Aberystwyth if I enter it.

I am grateful for your attention, Guard, but it was a foot-warmer that
I asked for, not the newspaper-boy.

As I have just been hurled down an embankment and find myself sitting
much bruised in a shallow pond in a field close to the line, I really
fancy that the Welsh-speaking signalman at the adjoining cabin has
failed to understand the message wired to him in English from our last
stopping station.

I should be glad, Stationmaster, if you would kindly have a telegram
sent to my friends saying that I have only four ribs broken.

As you do not appear to understand what I say, and as I suppose there
is nobody who knows English in this desolate Welsh valley where the
sufferers from the accident are lying, perhaps you will kindly have us
all sent back to Shrewsbury as soon as possible.

The man lying next to me, whose arm is hurt, says that the train
was not going to Aberystwyth at all. So perhaps it is as well that
circumstances have prevented my proceeding further in it.

We should undoubtedly have been much better off if this accident had
happened to us in France or Germany, because then we should have been
able to secure the services of the railway interpreter.

Thank Heaven! I am back at Chester, where the hotel people _do_ talk
English; and in future I shall vote steadily at elections against
any party that does not make the total suppression of all so-called
"national tongues" within the British Isles a part of its recognised
programme.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR BOOKING-OFFICE.

Mr. RUDOLF LEHMANN possesses some gifts which peculiarly qualify him
to write the volume SMITH, ELDER & CO. publish, under the title _An
Artist's Reminiscences_. He has passed the age of three-score and
ten, and has throughout that period had many opportunities of seeing
places, and, more precious, of meeting people. To the study of both
he brings keen sight, a good memory, and a genuine, not too obtrusive,
sense of humour. Born in Hamburg in 1819, he has sojourned in most of
the capitals of Europe, permanently settling down to marriage and life
in London. He seems to have known most of the notable personages of
the middle and latter half of the century. His wide acquaintance with
royalty (some of them mad) would be appalling if it were not mentioned
with winning modesty. The volume abounds in good stories, my
Baronite particularly delighting in one pertaining to the ceremony of
prorogation of parliament by the QUEEN. Mr. LEHMANN was much struck
with the spectacle of the old Duke of WELLINGTON carrying the sword of
state, Lord LANSDOWNE bearing the crown, and the Marquis of WINCHESTER
with the cap of maintenance set on red velvet cushion. At Lady
GRANVILLE'S the same evening he asked Lord GRANVILLE what was the
significance of the cap of maintenance. It was one of the few
things Lord GRANVILLE did not know. "But," he said, "there is Lord
WINCHESTER, who carried it this morning. I will go and ask him." The
two peers conversed in a whisper, and Lord GRANVILLE, returning to
his inquiring friend, said, "He does not know either." Mr. LEHMANN
incidentally mentions that his brother HENRY'S first success, at the
Salon of 1835, was gained by a picture setting forth "_Le Depart du
Jeune Tobie_." At that date TOBY had not even arrived to take his
place on the volumes in his master's study, and still less, was he
M.P. for Barks. It only shows how prophetic is the soul of genius.

  THE BARON DE BOOK-WORMS.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YEAR REFLECTION.

(_By an Old-fashioned Fellow._)

  "Goodwill to man!" the dear old carol saith.
    Ah me! Then why so much mean personal pother?
  We're credulous of aught that means the scathe
    Of a sad sister, or a stumbling brother.
  Men are like stout JOHN BUNYAN'S "Little Faith,"--
    Save in believing evil of each other!
  There faith indeed is strong; but 'tis a rarity
  That such strange Faith is found combined with Charity!

       *       *       *       *       *

MEM. BY A MUSER.--Many a spouting member of the "Independent Labour
Party" is a "party" who wishes to be independent of labour. _Hardie_
Norsemen, please note!

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PREPARING FOR THE PARLIAMENTARY PANTOMIME. THEATRE
ROYAL, ST. STEPHEN'S.

PARTY COLOURISTS AT WORK ON THE PROPERTIES.]

       *       *       *       *       *

TO JULIA'S POCKET.

    [The ideal lady's pocket, that shall at once be accessible
    to its owner and defy the footpad's art, has yet to be
    invented.--_Wears of Tautologus._]

  My JULIA'S chaste and winsome cheer,
  Her comely lip, her coral ear,
  And eke her knickerbocker gear,--

  These be the theme of rhyming folk,
  Whereof the skill I here invoke
  In malediction of her poke;

  In that it passeth human wit
  By sleight of hand withal to hit
  Upon the pathless track of it.

  Though JULIA'S self therein dispose'
  That napkin with the which she blows
  For sorry rheum her Greekish nose,

  Not if she search with heavy pain
  Shall she by taking thought attain
  To look upon the thing again;

  To him alone of mortal clay
  That picketh pokes beside the way
  Their deeps are open as the day.

  Whenas her alms she would disburse,
  In vain she probeth for her purse,
  Whereat the beggars shrewdly curse;

  Even so their teeth do felons gnash
  That lightly lift her ready cash,
  Which he that stealeth stealeth trash.

  Oft-times she doth full bravely hold
  Her breezy reticule of gold
  Within her digits' dainty fold;

  As certain maids, I well believe,
  Do wear th' affections on their sleeve
  For any worthless wight to reave.

  But though her purse not suffer rape,
  Mischance is like in other shape
  To put on her a saucy jape;--

  If so my lady at the mart
  For very joyaunce of her heart
  Do purchase her a pasty tart,

  Let her not make essay to bring
  So beauteous and frail a thing
  Within her poke's encompassing;

  Lest, sitting down with weary stress,
  Unheedful of its buxomness,
  She make a right unseemly mess!

  Certes a man purblind may see
  For these offences needs must be
  Some comfortable remedy;

  Whoso deviseth such an one,
  I trow that his invention
  Shall soothly pouch the peerless bun.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Gertrude._ "MY DEAR JESSIE, WHAT ON EARTH IS THAT
BICYCLE SUIT FOR?"

_Jessie._ "WHY, TO WEAR, OF COURSE."

_Gertrude._ "BUT YOU HAVEN'T GOT A BICYCLE!"

_Jessie._ "NO; BUT I'VE GOT A SEWING MACHINE!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.

_Perplexed._--You are entirely in error in supposing that the member
for Otley, Yorks, has, in accepting a baronetcy, descended from a
higher estate. You have been deceived by similarity of sound. The hon.
member was not of the same rank as a statesman (who we observe has
just repaired to his country seat at Pinley Park, where he will
entertain His Serene Highness the DUC DE SEIDLITZ-POUDRE) to whom
Sir ROBERT PEEL used to allude in the House of Commons as "the noble
Baron." In becoming Sir JOHN BARRAN, Bart., the member for Otley gains
a distinct step in the social ladder.

_Blind, Deaf, and Dumb._--We are pleased to be able to reassure
you. The fact that you have not lately heard or read speeches by Sir
WILLIAM HARCOURT is no evidence that the treble disability under which
you unhappily labour is increasing. There is a well known case, cited
in Littleton upon Coke, where a man was not able to see the Spanish
fleet "because it is not yet in sight." For analogous reason you have
not lately heard anything of the CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER. He has
not been speaking. The fact is, the SQUIRE OF MALWOOD--to use a title
by which he is locally known, and in which he most rejoices--was cut
out for a rustic recluse. Circumstances have, unwillingly, dragged him
into the front of politics, and he has done the duty that lies to his
hand. When opportunity can be made he takes his leisure at his
lodge in the New Forest, and meditates on the untimely fate of his
pre-Plantagenet forbear WILLIAM RUFUS. Nevertheless, we are not
without suspicion that Sir WILLIAM HARCOURT shares the peculiarity
of CARLYLE, of whom you will remember his wife shrewdly remarked that
"his love for silence is platonic." If you keep your ears open and
your mouth shut, you may probably, before long, hear the familiar
voice resounding from a public platform.

_A Shakspearean Student._--We had not before heard of the incident. It
is, however, quite possible, as you have been informed, that when
the Marquis of SALISBURY, K.G., heard of the defection of the Earl of
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE, who has joined the Liberal forces, the only remark he
made was "Off with his head."

       *       *       *       *       *

OVERHEARD FRAGMENT OF A DIALOGUE

_Lord Illingworth._ My dear GORING, I assure you that a well-tied tie
is the first serious step in life.

_Lord Goring._ My dear ILLINGWORTH, five well-made button-holes a day
are far more essential. They please women, and women rule society.

_Lord Illingworth._ I understood you considered women of no
importance?

_Lord Goring._ My dear GEORGE, a man's life revolves on curves of
intellect. It is on the hard lines of the emotions that a woman's
life progresses. Both revolve in cycles of masterpieces. They should
revolve on bi-cycles; built, if possible, for two. But I am keeping
you?

[Illustration: "Full of good things!"]

_Lord Illingworth._ I wish you were. Nowadays it is only the poor who
are kept at the expense of the rich.

_Lord Goring._ Yes. It is perfectly comic, the number of young men
going about the world nowadays who adopt perfect profiles as a useful
profession.

_Lord Illingworth._ Surely that must be the next world? How about the
Chiltern Thousands?

_Lord Goring._ Don't. GEORGE. Have you seen WINDERMERE lately? Dear
WINDERMERE! I should like to be exactly unlike WINDERMERE.

_Lord Illingworth._ Poor WINDERMERE! He spends his mornings in doing
what is possible, and his evenings in saying what is probable. By the
way, do you really understand all I say?

_Lord Goring._ Yes, when I don't listen attentively.

_Lord Illingworth._ Reach me the matches, like a good boy--thanks.
Now--define these cigarettes--as tobacco.

_Lord Goring._ My dear GEORGE, they are atrocious. And they leave me
unsatisfied.

_Lord Illingworth._ You are a promising disciple of mine. The only use
of a disciple is that at the moment of one's triumph he stands behind
one's chair and shouts that after all he is immortal.

_Lord Goring._ You are quite right. It is as well, too, to remember
from time to time that nothing that is worth knowing can be learnt.

_Lord Illingworth._ Certainly, and ugliness is the root of all
industry.

_Lord Goring._ GEORGE, your conversation is delightful, but your views
are terribly unsound. You are always saying insincere things.

_Lord Illingworth._ If one tells the truth, one is sure sooner or
later to be found out.

_Lord Goring._ Perhaps. The sky is like a hard hollow sapphire. It is
too late to sleep. I shall go down to Covent Garden and look at the
roses. Good-night, GEORGE! I have had such a pleasant evening!

       *       *       *       *       *

DEATH IN THE CUP.

    ["The social duty of paying calls, refreshed, as it
    necessarily is, by frequent cups of tepid tea, is apparently
    little better than a process of slow poisoning."--_Daily
    Graphic._]

  Oh, here's a pretty state of things! Whenever you go calling,
    And take this deadly liquor and imbibe it without stint,
  You're certainly preparing a catastrophe appalling,
    Your mirth is as the little lamb's, unmindful of the mint.

  And when your entertainer, who seems so sweetly placid
    And quite unlike a criminal, suggests "Another cup?"
  She might as well be offering a dose of prussic acid,
    And the Public Prosecutor ought to take the matter up!

  "The cup that cheers"--that hackneyed phrase is frightfully in error,
    If seldom it "inebriates" (it _does_, the doctors plead),
  There lurks within its fatal draught a more efficient terror,
    'Twill shortly make a funeral your one and only need!

  So since a daily cup or two the thin end of the wedge is,
    And since this revelation of our danger has been made,
  We all will wear red ribbons and will sign the strictest pledges,
    And speedily inaugurate an "Anti-Tea" crusade.

  A word to you, AMANDA mine. Unless your cruel kindness,
    Your efforts to consign me to an early grave, shall cease,
  And if you dare, presuming on my long-continued blindness,
    To offer me a cup of tea--I'll send for the police!

[Illustration: "A word to you, Amanda mine!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE TIME OF DAY.--Good, after NEWNES to find the style "Bart." The
bestowal of the baronetcy quite a Tit-Bit for the Strand. But there
is no truth in the report that the event will be followed by the
establishment of a new morning paper to be called _The Dragon_, and
edited by Sir GEORGE.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CHRONICLES OF A RURAL PARISH.

IX.--OF COAL.

The County Council has solved the great Mudford mystery by deciding in
favour of Mrs. ARBLE MARCH, who is in the seventh heaven at being the
Seventh Councillor. A wise Legislature had it in contemplation that
possibly when the great measure came to be worked, it might not
be found to act, however much you pulled the string, and it was
accordingly left to the County Council to set on its legs any poor
little Parish Council which might have been brought into the world
without its full number of members. Thus it came about that Mrs. MARCH
got elected. The actual circumstances of her election gave rise
to some comment. She was proposed by the Primrose League Ruling
Councillor of one adjoining parish, and seconded by the Knight
Harbinger of another. Our County Council is a strongly Tory body, and
she was easily elected. There was a great outcry against this, as an
act of political partisanship. It was. But when it became known that
Mrs. LETHAM HAVITT'S friends and supporters were all avowed Radicals,
popular indignation seemed suddenly to flicker out.

It may be, however, that the indignation only transferred itself to
me, for I myself have got, in a most extraordinary and unexpected
fashion, into a great hobble. It arose in this way. Having been
elected on to the Parish Council at the top of the poll, and
having, moreover, been subsequently the recipient of innumerable
congratulations from my fellow-parishioners, I not unnaturally--so I
still venture to think--desired in some way to show my appreciation of
the kind treatment I had received. I accordingly determined to make
to every elector a present of coals, and to carry out that intention
issued the following circular:--

    _To the Electors of Mudford._

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,--For your kindness in electing me at the top of
the poll, I can find no terms sufficiently warm to express myself. In
commemoration of the great occasion, and as a small thankoffering for
my return, I beg your acceptance of the enclosed Coal Ticket, which
will entitle you to 2 cwt. of coal from any of the village coal
dealers.

  Your obliged and obedient servant,

  TIMOTHY WINKINS.

I sent this to every elector, high or low, rich or poor. I hardly
imagined that the Squire would want coal, but he was a constituent
of mine, and he had his ticket. What has been the result of my
generosity? This. Whilst almost every coal-ticket has been used, I
am denounced right and left in unmeasured terms as an unscrupulous
briber. Miss PHILL BURTT (who, as might be expected, has been most
kind and sympathetic about the whole thing), tells me that even the
Squire said it was a very ingenious way of wishing myself Many Happy
Returns to the Parish Council. A poor joke, I think, but an undeniably
excellent sneer. BLACK BOB is, as might be expected, much more
plain and direct in his denunciation. He says, that if I stand for
re-election--in April, 1896!--this ought to be enough to unseat me.
A pleasant prospect. I can do nothing. My boats, like my coal, are
burnt.

What happened at the Parish Council meeting last night I must
leave--till my next.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SYMPATHY WANTED--

For the Man whose Collar comes undone every time he tries to do up his
Tie.]

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari,
January 12th, 1895, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH, JANUARY 12TH, 1895 ***

***** This file should be named 42478.txt or 42478.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/4/7/42478/

Produced by Malcolm Farmer, Lesley Halamek and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
