The Project Gutenberg EBook of San Francisco and the Nicaragua Canal, by
William Lawrence Merry

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: San Francisco and the Nicaragua Canal

Author: William Lawrence Merry

Release Date: April 27, 2013 [EBook #42603]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SAN FRANCISCO AND NICARAGUA CANAL ***




Produced by David Garcia, Ernest Schaal, Bryan Ness and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









                             SAN FRANCISCO

                                  AND

                          THE NICARAGUA CANAL.


                               LEGATION OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
                                SAN JOSE, COSTA RICA, CENTRAL AMERICA,
                                                     September 15, 1900.

HON. GEORGE C. PERKINS,
    United States Senator,
        San Francisco, California.

MY DEAR SIR:

Your valued favor of August 23d requests me to contest the argument of
a mutual friend entitled to our personal esteem, in regard to the
Nicaragua Canal, to the construction of which he objects. The
admission made by him that _his argument is not made on very broad
lines_ would indispose me to reply, as the Nicaragua Canal is a
national undertaking, not to be considered from a narrow standpoint.
But, confident that even his narrow premises will not stand impartial
investigation, I shall contest his arguments first from his restricted
platform, and subsequently in the brief manner necessitated by the
limits of this paper, on a broader and more patriotic basis.

In examining his statement of navigable distances I note some serious
errors, consequently you will find herewith a statement thereof for
which I can vouch as emanating from the United States Hydrographic
office. During my Central American residence I have visited various
United States naval ships on this station and have found one naval
lieutenant opposed to the canal. On urging him to candidly state his
reason for this opposition, he at first stated that his reason was a
personal one and like our friend's _not made on very broad lines_. He
finally admitted that he opposed a canal because if we do not have one
we shall need two navies, one on each side of the Continent; more naval
officers would be necessary and his promotion would ensue much more
rapidly! Although at first surprised at this view of the case I thanked
him for his friendly candor, and replied that his argument as a
_personal_ one was on a sound basis, much more so than the railway
magnates who oppose the Canal on the erroneous ground that their
overland railways will be injured thereby when I challenge anyone to
cite an instance where any canal has not benefited the railways nearest
thereto: notably the St. Mary's and Erie Canals in our own country.

Our friend starts with the assumption that the canal is _to be
constructed for the purpose of making money_. This I deny _in toto_. The
United States Government will build a canal on a broader and more
beneficent basis, for the _political_ and _military safety_ of our
country, for the _development of its commerce and industries_ and to
secure a _short cheap water_ route to and from our Pacific Ocean
possessions. The Suez Canal which cost ninety-four millions was built to
make money and earns 17 to 20 per cent. annually on a toll of about
$1.85 per ton, whereas our Government should not charge over one dollar
per ton when the Nicaragua Canal is opened and when its traffic
increases, probably half a dollar per ton will pay cost of maintenance
and leave a small percentage for a sinking fund.

Secondly, he states "the Canal will have no business when first
opened." Why not? Will freight continue to prefer ten thousand miles
greater distance around Cape Horn or higher Panama Railway Route and
overland railway charges? The business of the Canal will come from new
interests which it will develop and from other routes which cannot
compete with it in rates. Third. He asserts that it will cost no less
than $150,000,000.00. How much the Canal will cost depends upon its
capacity and its honest construction. Since the Maritime Canal Company
figured on $80,084,176.00 for a 28-feet canal, the majority report of
the United States Commission has increased the _possible_ cost,
including a 20 per cent. contingency to $118,113,790 for a canal two
feet deeper and much wider, with duplicate locks of increased size. But
experts who have investigated the question have no fear of financial
results even at the cost of one hundred and fifty millions.

Fourth. I deny that it will _be much more expensive to operate than the
Suez Canal_, which needs constant dredging to keep it from filling with
desert sands, as against the nominal cost of operating modern locks at
Nicaragua, proof of which we have in the cost of lockage at the Saint
Mary's Canal, which now passes through its locks nearly three times the
tonnage that uses the Suez Canal. Neither is there apprehension of
difficulty in water control at Nicaragua. Nature has provided against
this as any canal engineer who has examined the route can prove. _An
abundance of fresh water under absolute control_ is the _striking
advantage_ developed at Nicaragua, as against the Suez Canal built
through an irreclaimable sand desert, constantly encroaching upon it and
necessitating constant dredging. But I may remark that the Suez canal
with an expensive staff expends only 8-1/2 per cent. of gross receipts
for management while the cheapest and most efficient railway in the
United States uses 47 per cent. of gross receipts for operating
expenses, and many of our railways between 50 and 60 per cent. This is
one of several reasons why a canal can afford to carry cheaper than any
railway; it has practically _no wear and tear_, and _no depreciation_ to
contend with.

Examining carefully the animus of the paper I find only two main points
to contest. First: The Nicaragua Canal will divert commerce from San
Francisco and other Pacific Coast Ports. Second: It is "outrageous and
inexcusable" that the Government shall create a competing route which
will injure railways overland which it has already aided in
construction. Having reasoned from a fallacious standpoint the
conclusions are without foundation and the last one entirely regardless
of the national and public interest. That the Nicaragua Canal will
divert maritime commerce from San Francisco and other Pacific Coast
Ports is a _fallacy_ based upon the proposition that, with the advantage
of five thousand miles navigation and canal toll in their favor the
merchants of Pacific Coast Ports will be unable to compete with their
Atlantic Coast and European rivals. Such proposition implies an
_incompetency_ which I am not disposed to admit. It is a fallacy for
another reason connected with navigation. A steamship from Hong Kong to
Western terminus of Nicaragua Canal, and vice versa, only increases her
distance by calling at San Francisco _twenty_ miles: from Yokohama
_ninety-one_ miles. The steam route from Yokohama to Brito (Western
terminus of Canal) via Honolulu (practically on rhumb line) is _374
miles longer_ and from Hong Kong _367 miles longer_. These two most
important ports illustrate the same fact as applicable to all other
Asiatic Ports within the distance attraction of the Canal, the
_divisional line_ of which from the United States Atlantic Coast is at
_Singapore_. The carriage of fuel being a serious factor in steamship
expense, and San Francisco being practically _a half-way port_ on a run
of over ten thousand miles it _must_ become a port of call for coal and
freight, for all steamships in the Atlantic Asiatic trade, unless such
special limited business offers at Hawaii as will induce them to
navigate nearly four hundred miles additional. Under these conditions
these steamships will often handle California freight to be discharged
and replaced with a _second_ freight for the Atlantic or for Asiatic
Ports while coaling. The increased tonnage using Pacific Coast Ports for
this reason will cheapen freights and add greatly to the business of its
Ports. It cannot be claimed that steamers will prefer the longest route.
Even between New York and Europe, where the shortest (or "great circle"
route) infringes upon Cape Race, the transatlantic steamers run that
dangerous, foggy and iceberg line, in preference to the longer _rhumb
line_ further south, to save a much less distance, and they will
certainly do so on the Pacific where the saving is much greater. I beg
attention to the subjoined third table of distances of proving the
assertions above made.

That the canal will _divert_ some overland traffic from the railways is
an indisputable fact. There must be a new adjustment of conditions. But
there will arise with this adjustment a full compensation which will
soon become _vastly more important_ than the long haul overland of a
class of freights which are only carried overland to avoid the 15,000
miles Cape Horn route. In the increased, vastly more profitable _short
haul_ to and from Pacific Coast tide water and in the increased
passenger travel consequent upon the rapid development of the Pacific
Coast our overland railways will find full compensation--the Canal will
be of great benefit to them. When the short and cheap water way is
available, European shipping to Pacific Ports will be largely steam
freight tonnage. These steamers will load holds with English cargo and
between decks with immigrants, and the Pacific Coast will rapidly settle
up with these to the exclusion of Chinese. To such desirable emigration
the Pacific Coast will for the first time be accessible at reasonable
rates. At present the few that have the means to start for the Coast by
overland railways are induced to settle in the middle West, and
consequently Pacific Coast population increases very slowly. The same
freight steamships will then return to Atlantic Ports, with Pacific
Coast products: Cape Horn will become a memory.

The United States Government has covered into its Treasury approximately
$113,000,000.00 which it loaned the overland railways; the enormous land
grants they keep. What "injustice or outrage" is there in _again_ using
this money to build another transportation route, national in character,
for the benefit of all the Republic? This is not even taxation of our
people: they have been once taxed to build the overland railways. I have
in mind an instance where 1,500 barrels provisions were shipped from
Sioux City, Iowa, to Jersey City, lightered to the California bound ship
in East River, New York; carried 15,000 miles around Cape Horn, paying
rail freight Eastward, lighterage, Cape Horn freight, insurance, six
months interest and San Francisco wharfage; after all these charges
saving _one third on the rail freight_ westward from Sioux City to the
Pacific. Freight rates eastward on Pacific Coast perishable products are
even higher. You are aware that, to save the onerous westward freight
charges by rail, California merchants have repeatedly shipped heavy
goods by steam from our Atlantic Ports to Antwerp: thence reshipped via
Cape Horn to San Francisco, paying charges before named, and would be
now doing so save for Customs regulations forbidding it. It cannot be
expected that freight can be carried by rail across the continent more
than three thousand miles over two mountain chains and compete in cost
with water transportation which under conditions most favorable to rail
transportation costs only one-fifth, while, with heavy grades, the ratio
is one by water to fifteen by rail. In the effort to control such
freight, the overland railways are _preventing the development of the
Pacific Coast_ to their own detriment and against the interests of our
great country. The day will come when these railway managers will regard
their opposition to the Canal as error born of _unfounded apprehension_.
Even now one of the main overland railway systems is quietly friendly to
the Canal. Water transportation has its limitations, mainly _cheapness
at the expense of time_. Railway transportation also has its
limitations, mainly _speed at increased cost_. One is the complement of
the other--not properly its competitor, and by carriage of cheap and
bulky freight which is frequently unprofitable to railways on a long
haul, water transportation can and is being used to _aid_ railways. Even
Mr. Huntington frequently shipped his railway iron around Cape Horn, as
he would have done through the canal had it been available. While
controlling a railway system from ocean to ocean, he bought out the
"Morgan Steamship Company" between New York and New Orleans and with the
advantage of this _one-third water route_, dictated terms to his railway
competitors. Could he have better expressed his true appreciation of
cheap water carriage and of the inter-oceanic canal?

The limits of this letter forbid a full discussion of navigation
distances, and besides this, distances are not fully conclusive.
Considerations of traffic, ocean currents, available coaling stations,
and return cargoes must be taken into account. But I shall briefly
allude to prominent points in connection with navigable distances which
are proven by U. S. Hydrographic Tables. Considering New York as the
starting point, the _divisional line_ between Suez and Nicaragua Canal
influence in Asiatic commerce is _Singapore_, which port is only 29
miles nearer New York via Suez than Nicaragua. Consequently _all Asiatic
Ports north of Singapore_ are within the attraction of the American
Canal for United States commerce. The immense trade of these ports is an
important factor. In Australia, all ports East of and including
Melbourne are much nearer New York than via Suez. New Zealand, the
coasts of North and South America on both oceans and all Pacific Ocean
Island groups the same. No claim to important diversion from the Suez
Canal can be made, as the distance from the United States to Port Said
protects it. Nor is a claim to diversion from Suez Canal needed. The
Nicaragua Canal had within its zone of attraction, as shown by careful
estimates in 1890, 8,159,150 tons annually. The revenue attainable
therefrom will depend upon rate of toll, but at one dollar per ton, with
10 per cent. for operating expenses (or 1-1/2 per cent. more than at
Suez) it will leave a safe sinking fund even on $150,000,000.00 cost,
or, by an extension of time, on a greater amount. But the earnings will
rapidly increase. You will note that the Suez Canal merely diverted
gradually an _ancient_ commerce, the increase of which has been steady
but comparatively slow. The Nicaragua Canal can depend upon an already
large commerce, yet in its _incipiency_. The resources of the American
continent are _undeveloped_ and its population _limited_. No man can
place a limit upon the future commerce of this great division of the
habitable world. Another feature in favor of the Nicaragua Canal is _the
region through which it will be built_. While its length is 169 miles,
it has 121 miles of free slack water and lake navigation, through a
territory of unsurpassed fertility, blessed with a healthy climate.
Thus, _it is not only an inter-oceanic canal but a line of inland
navigation_ which will so develop the territory on each side that in a
few yew years its commerce will pay the cost of maintenance. The benefit
of a fresh water canal to ocean carriers of steel or iron will be
obvious to experts: they will leave it with clean bottoms and boilers
filled with fresh water. Its location is 11 deg. North of the Equator and in
the North East trade regions, an advantage that will enable sailing
ships to avail of it. Cape Horn is twelve hundred miles South of the
Cape of Good Hope and the American Canal consequently saves greater
distances than the Suez or any other canal that can hereafter be
constructed.

The _naval_ and _political_ advantage of the Canal is a technical
question regarding which my opinion is given with deference. But I find
that its opponents are not found in the Government service. Military and
Naval officers discuss the _advisability of fortifying_ the canal _never
doubting its great importance to our country_.

Quotations are available to prove that many of our greatest statesmen
have been its ardent advocates, but space forbids. I may mention among
these Grant, Harrison, Hayes, McKinley and Bryan as well as a nearly
unanimous Senate and House are recorded in its favor. Are all these
great minds dullards on the Canal question? Are they not the men who
_ought to understand_ the great interests of our country, _impartially_
considered?

As my advocacy for this beneficent work for a quarter of a century may
be regarded as warping my judgment in its favor, I will end this already
too extended reply by quoting _Archibald Ross Colquhoun_, an eminent
English Engineer and Government Administrator, who, having personally
examined the Nicaragua Canal route and the plans adopted for its
construction, wrote a standard work _The Key of the Pacific_ (Longhams,
London, 1895) which ends with the following conclusions (page 335):

1. It will render greater service to the New World than the Suez Canal
does to the Old.

2. It will bring Japan, Northern China, Australasia and part of Malaysia
nearer the Atlantic cities of the United States than they are now to
England.

3. It will benefit America in an infinitely greater degree than it will
Europe, which will only use the Canal in trading with the Pacific
littoral of the two Americas, the South Sea Islands and possibly New
Zealand.

4. It will divert little or no European traffic from the Suez Canal.

5. It will give an immense impulse to United States manufactures,
especially cotton and iron, and will greatly stimulate the shipbuilding
industry and development of the naval power of the United States.

6. It will cost more than the estimates show ($80,084,176.00 at that
time) but it will have a traffic greater than is usually admitted.

7. In the interest of the world it must be neutralized, and the true
policy of the United States is to forward that end and thus make this
international highway a powerful factor for the preservation of peace.

To the eminently conservative and disinterested conclusions of this
patriotic English expert, I may be permitted to give my adherence no
less than to the publicly expressed opinions of the great American
statesmen whose names I have mentioned and to the practically unanimous
approval of the Congress of the United States, after having actively
discussed the Canal question for twenty years.

With assurances of my highest esteem I beg to remain,

                            Sir:
                      Your most obedient servant,
                                             WILLIAM LAWRENCE MERRY.




                       NICARAGUA CANAL DISTANCES.


             NEW YORK VIA NICARAGUA COMPARED WITH LIVERPOOL
                               VIA SUEZ.
        New York to Singapore      11,549 m.     29 m. more.
            "     " Hong Kong      11,308 m.  2,363 m. less.
            "     " Yokohama        9,363 m.  5,951 m. less.
            "     " Melbourne      10,000 m.  4,920 m. less.

                               * * * * *

    New York to San Francisco    {10,753 m. less than via Cape Horn.
    New Orleans to San Francisco {11,853 m. less than via Cape Horn.

Distances saved via Magellan Straits vary between different ports, but
may be approximately stated at two thousand miles.




                       NICARAGUA CANAL DISTANCES


       U. S. Hydrographic Office, proving San Francisco to be on
    Asiatic Route to and from Brito, the Pacific Terminus of Canal.

                                                    | Knots. | Knots.
----------------------------------------------------+--------+-------
The shortest practicable route from                 |        |
  Brito to Yokohama                                 | ....   | 7145
  Brito to San Francisco                            | 2700   |
  San Francisco to Yokohama                         | 4536   |
                                                    |--------|
Therefore the distance from Brito to Yokohama       |        |
  via San Francisco is                              | ....   | 7236
Therefore excess of route via San Francisco over    |        |
  shortest practicable route is                     | ....   | =91=
    Brito to Honolulu                               | 4210   |
    Honolulu to Yokohama                            | 3400   |
                                                    |--------|
Shortest practicable route from Brito to Yokohama   |        |
  via Honolulu                                      | ....   | 7610
Therefore excess of route via Honolulu over route   |        |
  via San Francisco is                              | ....   |  374
                                                    |        |-------
The shortest practicable route from                 |        |
  Brito to Hong Kong                                | ....   | 8740
  Brito to San Francisco                            | 2700   |
  San Francisco to Hong Kong                        | 6060   |
                                                    |--------|
Therefore the distance from Brito to Hong Kong      |        |
  via San Francisco is                              | ....   | 8760
Therefore excess of route via San Francisco over    |        |
  shortest practicable route is                     | ....   | =20=
    Brito to Honolulu                               | 4210   |
    Honolulu to Hong Kong                           | 4917   |
                                                    |--------|
Therefore the distance from Brito to Hong Kong      |        |
  via Honolulu is                                   | ....   | 9127
                                                    |        |
Therefore the excess of route via Honolulu over     |        |
  route via San Francisco is                        | ....   |  367
----------------------------------------------------+--------+-------

The conditions as to the distances in Trans-Pacific Navigation apply
approximately to all United States Pacific Coast Ports.




    TABLE OF DISTANCES IN NAUTICAL MILES BETWEEN PORTS OF THE WORLD,
              and Distances Saved by the Nicaragua Canal,

 Compiled from data furnished by the United States Hydrographic Office.


========================================================================
  BETWEEN         |        |        |       |       |         |
                  |Around  |  Via   |       |       |Advantage|Advantage
                  | Cape   |Magellan|  Via  |Via    |   over  |   over
                  | Horn   |for full|Cape of|Nica-  | Sailing |  Steam
                  |  for   |powered | Good  |ragua  |  Route  |  Route
                  |Sailing | Steam  | Hope. |Canal. |   via   |    via
                  |Vessels.|Vessels.|       |       |  Cape.  | Magellan
                  |        |        |       |       |         | Straits.
------------------+--------+--------+-------+-------+---------+---------
New York and      |        |        |       |       |         |
  San Francisco   | 15660  | 13174  | ..... |  4907 | 10753   |  8267
  Puget Sound     | .....  | 13935  | ..... |  5665 | .....   |  8270
  Hong Kong       | .....  | .....  | 13750 | 10692 |  3058   | .....
  Yokohama        | .....  | .....  | 15217 |  9227 |  5990   | .....
  Melbourne       | 13760  | 12860  | 12830 |  9862 |  3898   |  2998
  Auckland, N. Z. | 12600  | 11599  | 14069 |  8462 |  4138   |  3137
  Honolulu, H. I. | 15480  | 13290  | ..... |  6417 |  7063   |  6873
  Callao          | .....  |  9640  | ..... |  3744 | .....   |  5896
  Valparaiso      |  9420  |  8440  | ..... |  5014 |  4406   |  3426
                  |        |        |       |       |         |
New Orleans and   |        |        |       |       |         |
  San Francisco   | 16000  | 13539  | ..... |  4147 | 11853   |  9392
  Callao          | .....  | 10005  | ..... |  2984 | .....   |  7021
  Valparaiso      | .....  |  8805  | ..... |  4254 | .....   |  4551
                  |        |        |       |       |         |
Liverpool and     |        |        |       |       |         |
  San Francisco   | 15620  | 13494  | ..... |  7627 |  7993   |  5867
  Auckland, N. Z. | 12130  | 11919  | 13357 | 11182 |   948   |   737
  Callao          | .....  |  9960  | ..... |  6464 | .....   |  3496
  Valparaiso      |  9380  |  8760  | ..... |  7734 |  1646   |  1026
  Honolulu        | .....  | 13610  | ..... |  9137 | .....   |  4473
  Yokohama        | .....  | .....  | 14505 | 11947 | .....   |  2558
------------------+--------+--------+-------+-------+---------+---------




                           Transcriber Notes:

Passages in italics were indicated by _underscores_.

Passages in bold were indicated by =equal signs=.

Small caps were replaced with ALL CAPS.

Errors in punctuation and inconsistent hyphenation were not corrected
unless otherwise noted.

The tables at the end of the book has been reformatted to fit the page
 width.

On page 2, "will he injured" was replaced with "will be injured".

On page 2, "maintenace" was replaced with "maintenance".

On page 2, "per centage" was replaced with "percentage".

On page 3, "Nicaragura" was replaced with "Nicaragua".

On page 3, "overand" was replaced with "overland".

On page 7, "extention" was replaced with "extension".

On page 9, "personallly" was replaced with "personally".





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of San Francisco and the Nicaragua Canal, by
William Lawrence Merry

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SAN FRANCISCO AND NICARAGUA CANAL ***

***** This file should be named 42603.txt or 42603.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/6/0/42603/

Produced by David Garcia, Ernest Schaal, Bryan Ness and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
