                           THE DESERTED CITY




This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license.



Title: The Deserted City
Author: Francis Sherman
Release Date: May 08, 2013 [EBook #42667]
Language: English
Character set encoding: US-ASCII


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DESERTED CITY ***




Produced by Al Haines.





                           THE DESERTED CITY

                     Stray Sonnets written by F. S.
                      and Rescued for the Few who
                           Love them by H. D.


                 [Illustration: Title page decoration]


                          _Privately Printed_
                               MDCCCXCIX




                           THE DESERTED CITY



    THE HOUSE OF NIGHT

    Though all the light were lifted from the land,
    And a great darkness lay upon the sea;
    Though, groping each for some not-careless hand,
    I felt sad men pass over wearily;
    Though it were certain dawn would not come in
    With the next hour; that after many days
    Would no moon rise where the grey clouds grew thin,
    Nor any stars resume their ancient ways:
    Though all my world was thus, and I more blind
    Than the dead, blundering planets raining past,
    I know I should not fancy Time unkind;
    For you, as once of old you came, at last
    Would surely come, and with unfaltering faith
    Lead me beyond the dominance of death.




    THE HOUSE OF DOUBT

    Why should we fear?  The sun will surely rise,
    If we but wait, to light us on our way.
    Think you none hearkeneth to us who pray,
    That no God's heart is softened by our cries?
    Did we not learn that He was kind and wise
    And loved our souls?  And shall your bodies say
    "There is no light.  The tales they told us,--they
    Were only dreams, dreamed in the House of Lies."
    Nay, listen not to what your body saith,
    But by the memory of those antique years
    When it was evil and of little faith
    And led the soul along a way of tears,
    Let your soul chant--as one that hath no fears--
    "We know that Thou art stronger, God, than death."




    THE HOUSE OF MERCY

    I question not, Beloved, nor deny
    That you had God's own right of punishment;
    Yet now my sins and days are over and spent
    Find you the hours so pleasant that go by?
    Would not the colour of the fields and sky,
    The odour of the woods, bring more content
    Now, if a little pity had been lent
    Then, unto love, to judge a life awry?
    Upon a day the young June grasses seem
    Quite still that keep the edge of the still stream;
    I think you go down close to them, and say:
    "O little grasses, waiting patiently,
    I come to tell you this is God's decree:
    '_I comfort him who suffered yesterday?_'"




    THE HOUSE OF EARTH

    O ye disconsolate and heavy-souled,
    That evening cometh when ye too shall learn
    The pangs of one who may no more return,
    To live again the uneven days of old.
    Ye too shall weary of the myrrh and gold
    (Seeing the gods and their great unconcern),
    And, as I yearn to-day, your feet shall yearn
    To touch that Earth which ye afar behold.
    Think now upon your grievous things to bear,--
    Some goal unwon, some old sin's lurid stain,
    Your vistaed paths,--are they not fair as hope?
    But I between dead suns must peer, and grope
    Among forsaken worlds, one glimpse to gain
    Of my old place--the heaviest shadow there.




    THE HOUSE OF FAITH

    I would not have thee, dear, in darkness sit,
    On days like this, hand clasped in quiet hand,
    Remembering mournfully that fragrant land--
    Each day therein, the joy we had of it.
    Rather, while still the lamps are trimmed and lit,
    Bid strangers to the feasts that once we planned,
    Merry the while!  Until the dust's demand
    My soul, not thine, shall separately submit.
    So, when thou comest (for I at last will call
    And thou shalt hear, and linger not at all),
    Still to thy throat, thine arms, thy loosened hair
    Will cling the savour of the World's fresh kiss,
    So sweet to me! and doubly sweet for this--
    That thou for mine shouldst leave a place so fair!




    THE HOUSE OF TEARS

    When in the old years I had dreams of thee
    Thy dark walls stood in a most barren place;
    And he within (was his wan face _my_ face?)
    Wandered alone and wept continually.
    There was no bird to hear, nor sun to see,
    Nor green thing growing; nor for his release
    Came sleep; neither forgetfulness nor peace:
    Whereby I knew that none had sinned as he.
    To-day I met him where white lilies gleam;
    Across our path we watched the sparrows flit;
    Until--the sunlight strong in our dry eyes--
    He paused with me beside a green-edged stream,
    Moaning, "I know, where its young waters rise,
    Remembering, one leaneth over it."




    THE HOUSE OF LOVE

    Often between the midnight and the morn
    I wake and see the angels round my bed;
    Then fall asleep again, well-comforted.
    I wait not now till that clear dawn be born
    Shall lead my feet (O Love, thine eyes are worn
    With watching) where her feet have late been led;
    Nor lie awake, saying the words she said--
    (Her yellow hair.--Have ye seen yellow corn?)
    I fall asleep and dream and quite forget,
    For here in heaven I know a new love's birth
    Which casteth out all memory.  And yet
    (As I had loved her more, O Christ, on earth,
    Hadst Thou not been so long unsought, unmet)
    Some morrow Thou shalt learn my worship's worth.




    THE HOUSE OF BEAUTY

    She pauseth; and as each great mirror swings
    (O ruined Helen, O once golden hair)
    I see OEnone's ashes scattered there.
    Another, and, behold, the shadowed things
    Are violated tombs of shrunken kings.
    And yet another (O, how thou wert fair!),
    And I see one, black-clad, who prayeth where
    No sound of sword on cloven helmet rings.
    Yet, were I Paris, once more should I see
    Troy's seaward gates for us swung open wide.
    Or old Nile's glory, were I Anthony.
    Or, were I Launcelot, the garden-side
    At Joyous Gard.  Surely; for even to me,
    Where Love hath lived hath Beauty never died.




    THE HOUSE OF CONTENT

    Were once again the immortal moment mine
    How should I choose my path?  The path I chose
    (How long ago I wonder if Time knows)
    Even now I see.  I see the old sun shine
    Upon the moss, thick strewn with fir and pine;
    The open field; the orchard's even rows;
    The wood again; then, where the hills unclose,
    Far off at first, now near, the long-sought shrine.
    O Time, how impotent thou art!  Though thou
    Hast taken me from all things, and all things
    From me,--although the wind of thy swift wings
    Hath swept at last the shadow from her brow
    Of my last kiss, yet do I triumph now
    Who, choosing, paused to hear Love's counsellings.




    THE HOUSE OF CHANGE

    Was it last Autumn only, when I stood
    At the field's edge, and watched the red glow creep
    Among the leaves, and saw the swift flame sweep
    From spruce to hemlock, till the living wood
    Became a devastated solitude?
    For now, behold, old seeds, long years asleep,
    Wake; and a legion of young birches leap
    To life, and tell the ashes life is good.
    O Love of long ago, when this mad fire
    Is over, and the ruins of my soul
    With the Spring wind the old quest would resume,--
    When age knocks at the inn of youth's desire,
    Shall the new growth, now worthier of the goal,
    Find still untenanted the chosen room?




    THE HOUSE OF REGRET

    It is not that I now were happier
    If with the dawn my tireless feet were led
    Along her path, till I saw her fair head
    Thrown back to make the sunshine goldener:
    For it is well, sometimes, the things that were
    Are over, ere their perfectness hath fled;
    Lest the old love of them should fade instead,
    And lie like ruins round the throne of her.
    Now with the wisdom of increasing years
    I know each ancient joy a cup for tears;
    Yet had I drunk, while they were draughts to praise,
    Deeper, I were not now as men that grow
    Old, and sit gazing out across the snow
    To dream sad dreams of wasted summer days.




    THE HOUSE OF WISDOM

    I had not thought (ah, God! had I but known!)
    That this sad hour should ever me befall,
    When thou I judged the holiest of all
    Should come to be the thing I must disown.
    Was it not true? that April morn? thy blown
    Gold hair around my hair for coronal?
    Or is this truer?--thou at the outer wall,
    Unroyal, and with unrepentant moan?
    Yet prize I now this wisdom I have won,
    Who must always remember?  Nay!  My tears
    Must close mine eyes--as thou wouldst hide thy face
    If some great meteor, kindred to the sun,
    Should haunt the undying stars ten million years
    To fall, some noon, dead in thy market place.




    THE HOUSE OF SIN

    When Time is done at last, and the last Spring
    Fadeth on earth, and thy gaze seeketh mine,
    Watch well for one whose face beareth for sign
    The legend of a soul's refashioning:
    As I shall watch for one whose pale hands bring
    The first faint violet, and know them thine
    Grown pitiful and come to build Love's shrine
    Where the old Aprils wait, unfaltering.
    Then the great floods between us will retire,
    And the long path I follow down will grow
    To be the path thy climbing feet desire;
    Until we meet at last, made glad, and know
    The cleansing hands that made my soul as snow
    Have kept alive in thine the ancient fire.




    THE HOUSE OF MUSIC

    Such space there is, such endless breadth of time
    Between me and my world of yesterday,
    I half forget what sounds these be that stray
    About my chamber, and grow and fall and climb.
    Listen!--that sweet reiterated chime,
    Doth it not mark some body changed to clay?
    That last great chord, some anguish far away?
    Hark! harmony ever now and faultless rhyme.
    O Soul of mine, among these lutes and lyres,
    These reeds, these golden pipes, and quivering strings,
    Thou knowest now that in the old, old years
    We who knew only one of all desires
    Came often even to music's furthest springs--
    To pass, because their waters gleamed like tears.




    THE HOUSE OF COLOUR

    Mine gold is here; yea, heavy yellow gold,
    Gathered ere Earth's first days and nights were fled;
    And all the walls are hung with scarfs of red,
    Broidered in fallen cities, fold on fold;
    The stained window's saints are aureoled;
    And all the textures of the East are spread
    On the paved floor, whereon I lay my head,
    And sleep, and count the coloured things of old.
    Once, when the hills and I were all aflame
    With envy of the pageant in the West
    (Except the sombre pine-trees--whence there came,
    Continually, the sigh of their unrest),
    A lonely crow sailed past me, black as shame,
    Hugging some ancient sorrow to his breast.




    THE FOURTH DAY

    As when the tideless, barren waters lay
    About the borders of the early earth;
    And small, unopened buds dreamt not the worth
    Of their incomparable gold array;
    And tall young hemlocks were not set a-sway
    By any wind; and orchards knew no mirth
    At Autumn time, nor plenteousness from dearth;
    And night and morning, then, were the first day,
    --Even so was I.  Yet, as I slept last night,
    My soul surged towards thy love's controlling power;
    And, quickened now with the sun's splendid might,
    Breaks into unimaginable flower,
    Knowing thy soul knows this for beacon-light--
    The culmination of the harvest hour.




    VICTORY

    Because your strife and labour have been vain,
    Ye who have striven, shall I forego, forget
    The far-off goal where to my feet were set
    In the old days when life was first made plain?
    Upward in April, who, meeting with the rain,
    Did turn, the first shy mayflowers still are met?
    I who have sought, yea, who am seeking yet,
    What pain have I like unto your sore pain?
    So let me go as one yearning, that braves,
    With shipmen that have knowledge of the sea,
    The wind disastrous and the ponderous waves
    (Because his love dwells in some far countree),
    Crying, "Not one of all your million graves
    Is deep enough to keep my love from me!"




    THE LAST STORM

    From north, from east, the strong wind hurries down
    Against the window-pane the sleet rings fast;
    The moon hath hid her face away, aghast,
    And darkness keeps each corner of the town.
    The garden hedges wear a heavy crown,
    And the old poplars shriek, as night drifts past,
    That, leagues on desolate leagues away, at last
    One comes to know he too must surely drown.
    And yet at noon, to-morrow, when I go
    Out to the white, white edges of the plain,
    I shall not grieve for this night's hurricane,
    Seeing how, in a little hollow, sinks the snow
    Around the southmost tree, where a lean crow
    Sits noisily impatient for the rain.




    A LAST WORD

    And if it be I shall not sing again,
    And thou have wonder at my silent ways,
    I pray thee think my days not weary days,
    Or that my heart is dumb for some new pain.
    Seeing that words are nought, nor may remain,
    Why should I strive with Time?  Come blame, come praise,
    I am but one of them his might betrays
    At last, when all men learn that all was vain.
    And yet one thing Time cannot wrest from me.
    Therefore, cry out, yea, even to the throng
    That pauseth not for echo of a song,
    "O, your red gold is very fair.  But he
    Is glad as heaven to loiter and dream along
    His Lady Beauty's path continually."






*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DESERTED CITY ***




A Word from Project Gutenberg


We will update this book if we find any errors.

This book can be found under: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/42667

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works to protect the
Project Gutenberg(tm) concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything
for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may
use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative
works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and
printed and given away - you may do practically _anything_ with public
domain eBooks.  Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.



The Full Project Gutenberg License


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg(tm) mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg(tm) License available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1. General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic works


*1.A.* By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works in your possession. If
you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

*1.B.* "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things
that you can do with most Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works even
without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph
1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic
works. See paragraph 1.E below.

*1.C.* The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of
Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works. Nearly all the individual works
in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you
from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg(tm) mission of promoting free access to electronic
works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg(tm) works in compliance with
the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg(tm) name
associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this
agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full
Project Gutenberg(tm) License when you share it without charge with
others.


*1.D.* The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg(tm) work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

*1.E.* Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

*1.E.1.* The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg(tm) License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg(tm) work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org

*1.E.2.* If an individual Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic work is
derived from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating
that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can
be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying
any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a
work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on
the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs
1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

*1.E.3.* If an individual Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic work is
posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and
distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and
any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg(tm) License for all works posted
with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of
this work.

*1.E.4.* Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project
Gutenberg(tm) License terms from this work, or any files containing a
part of this work or any other work associated with Project
Gutenberg(tm).

*1.E.5.* Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg(tm) License.

*1.E.6.* You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg(tm) work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg(tm) web site
(http://www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or
expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a
means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include
the full Project Gutenberg(tm) License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

*1.E.7.* Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg(tm) works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.8.* You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works
provided that

  - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
    the use of Project Gutenberg(tm) works calculated using the method
    you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
    to the owner of the Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark, but he has
    agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
    within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
    legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
    payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
    Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation."

  - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
    you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
    does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg(tm)
    License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
    copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
    all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg(tm)
    works.

  - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
    any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
    electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
    receipt of the work.

  - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
    distribution of Project Gutenberg(tm) works.


*1.E.9.* If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark. Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3. below.

*1.F.*

*1.F.1.* Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg(tm) collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works, and the
medium on which they may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but
not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription
errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a
defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

*1.F.2.* LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg(tm) trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees.
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY,
BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN
PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND
ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES
EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

*1.F.3.* LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

*1.F.4.* Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

*1.F.5.* Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

*1.F.6.* INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg(tm)
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg(tm) work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg(tm)


Project Gutenberg(tm) is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg(tm)'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg(tm) collection will remain
freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg(tm) and future generations. To
learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and
how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org .


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is
64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf . Contributions to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the
full extent permitted by U.S.  federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page
at http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation


Project Gutenberg(tm) depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where
we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways
including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,
please visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic
works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg(tm)
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg(tm) eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg(tm) eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless
a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks
in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

    http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg(tm),
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
