Project Gutenberg's He's Coming To-Morrow, by Harriet Beecher Stowe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: He's Coming To-Morrow

Author: Harriet Beecher Stowe

Release Date: August 1, 2013 [EBook #43373]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HE'S COMING TO-MORROW ***




Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)











HE'S COMING TO-MORROW




IDEAL MESSAGES

A series of booklets for friend to send to friend, having in mind the
conveying of a special word for a specific occasion. The elegant manner
of production and the genuine worth of the messages fully justify the
title of the series, for the complete books are assuredly "ideal."


Old English paper boards, embossed, each, net, 25 cents.

  1. =Beyond the Marshes.= By Ralph Connor. A Word of
     Encouragement.

  2. =Across the Continent of the Years.= By Newell Dwight
     Hillis.

  3. =For Eyes that Weep.= By Samuel G. Smith. A Word of Comfort
     to Those Bereaved of Little Children.

  4. =He's Coming To-morrow.= By Harriet Beecher Stowe. A Word on
     the Coming of Christ.

  5. =For Hearts that Hope.= By James G. K. McClure, D. D. A Word
     about Heaven.

  6. =Unto Him.= By Bishop John H. Vincent. A Simple Word about
     Coming to Jesus Christ.




HE'S COMING TO-MORROW

By HARRIET BEECHER STOWE

[Illustration]


    FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY
    CHICAGO      NEW YORK      TORONTO
    MCMI




"HE'S COMING TO-MORROW"

    "_The night is far spent; the day is at hand._"


MY soul vibrated for a moment like a harp. Was it true? The night, the
long night of the world's groping agony and blind desire? _Is_ it almost
over? _Is_ the day at hand?

Again: "THEY SHALL SEE THE SON OF MAN COMING IN A CLOUD, WITH POWER AND
GREAT GLORY. _And when these things come to pass, look up and rejoice,
for your redemption is nigh._"

Coming!--The Son of man really coming into _this_ world again with power
and great glory?

Will this really ever happen? Will this solid, commonplace earth see it?
Will these skies brighten and flash? and will upturned faces in this
city be watching to see Him coming?

So our minister preached in a solemn sermon; and for moments, at times,
I felt a thrill of reality in hearing. But as the well-dressed crowd
passed down the aisle, my neighbor, Mr. Stockton, whispered to me not to
forget the meeting of the bank directors on Monday evening, and Mrs.
Goldthwaite poured into my wife's ear a charge not to forget her party
on Thursday; and my wife, as she came out, asked me if I had observed
the extravagant toilet of Mrs. Rennyman.

"_So_ absurd," she said, "when her income, I know, cannot be half what
ours is! and I _never_ think of sending to Paris for my things; I should
look on it as morally wrong."

I spoke of the sermon. "Yes," said my wife, "what a sermon!--so solemn.
I wonder that all are not drawn to hear our rector. What could be more
powerful than such discourses? My dear, by the by, _don't_ forget to
change Mary's opal ring for a diamond one. Dear me! the Christmas
presents were all so on my mind that I was thinking of them every now
and then in church; and that was _so_ wrong of me!"

"My dear," said I, "sometimes it seems to me as if all our life were
unreal. We go to church, and the things that we hear are either true or
false. If they are true, what things they are! For instance, these
Advent sermons. If we are looking for _that_ coming, we ought to feel
and live differently from what we do! Do we really believe what we hear
in church? or is it a dream?"

"I _do_ believe," said my wife earnestly--she is a good woman, my
wife--"yes, I _do_ believe, but it is just as you say. Oh, dear! I feel
as if I am very worldly--I have so many things to think of!" and she
sighed.

So do I; for I knew that I, too, was very worldly. After a pause I said:
"Suppose Christ should really come this Christmas and it should be
authoritatively announced that He would be here to-morrow?"

"I think," said my wife, "there would be some embarrassment on the part
of our great men, legislators, and chief councilors, in anticipation of
a personal interview. Fancy a meeting of the city council to arrange a
reception for the Lord Jesus Christ!"

"Perhaps," said I, "He would refuse all offers of the rich and great.
Perhaps our fashionable churches would plead for His presence in vain.
He would not be in palaces."

"Oh!" said my wife earnestly, "if I thought our money separated us from
Him, I would give it _all_--yes, _all_--might I only see Him."

She spoke from the bottom of her heart, and for a moment her face was
glorified.

"You _will_ see Him some day," said I, "and the money we are willing to
give up at a word from Him will not keep Him from us."

That evening the thoughts of the waking hours mirrored themselves in a
dream.

I seemed to be out walking in the streets, and to be conscious of a
strange, vague sense of _something_ just declared, of which all were
speaking with a suppressed air of mysterious voices.

There was a whispering stillness around. Groups of men stood at the
corners of the street, and discussed an impending something with
suppressed voices.

I heard one say to another: "_Really_ coming! What? to-morrow?" And the
others said: "Yes, to-morrow; on Christmas Day He will be here."

It was night. The stars were glittering with a keen and frosty light;
the shops glistened in their Christmas array; but the same sense of
hushed expectancy pervaded every thing. There seemed to be nothing
doing; and each person looked wistfully upon his neighbor as if to say,
Have you heard?

Suddenly, as I walked, an angel-form was with me, gliding softly by my
side. The face was solemn, serene, and calm. Above the forehead was a
pale, tremulous, phosphorous, radiance of light, purer than any on
earth--a light of a quality so different from that of the street-lamps,
that my celestial attendant seemed to move in a sphere alone.

Yet, though I felt awe, I felt a sort of confiding love as I said: "Tell
me, is it really true? _Is_ Christ coming?"

"HE IS," said the angel. "To-morrow He will be here!"

"What joy!" I cried.

"Is it joy?" said the angel. "Alas, to many in this city it is only
terror! Come with me."

In a moment I seemed to be standing with him in a parlor of one of the
chief palaces of the city. A stout, florid, bald-headed man was seated
at a table covered with papers, which he was sorting over with nervous
anxiety, muttering to himself as he did so. On a sofa lay a sad-looking,
delicate woman, her emaciated hands clasped over a little book. The room
was, in all its appointments, a witness of boundless wealth. Gold and
silver, and gems, and foreign furniture, and costly pictures, and
articles of _virtu_--everything that money could buy--were heaped
together; and yet the man himself seemed to me to have been neither
elevated nor refined by the confluence of all these treasures. He seemed
nervous and uneasy. He wiped the sweat from his brow, and spoke:

"I don't know, wife, how _you_ feel; but _I_ don't like this news. I
don't understand it. It puts a stop to everything _I_ know anything
about."

"Oh, John!" said the woman, turning towards him a face pale and fervent,
and clasping her hands, "how can you say so?"

And as she spoke, I could see breaking out above her head a tremulous
light, like that above the brow of an angel.

"Well, Mary, it's the truth. I don't care if I say it. I don't want to
meet--well I wish He would put it off! What does He want of me? I'd be
willing to make over--well, three millions to found an hospital, if He'd
be satisfied and let me go on. Yes, I'd give three millions--to buy off
from to-morrow."

"Is He not our best friend?"

"Best friend!" said the man, with a look half fright, half anger. "Mary,
you don't know what you are talking about! You know I always hated those
things. There's no use in it; I can't see into them. In fact, I _hate_
them."

She cast on him a look full of pity. "_Cannot_ I make you see?" she
said.

"No, indeed, you can't. Why, look here," he added, pointing to the
papers. "Here is what stands for millions! To-night it's mine; and
to-morrow it will be all so much waste paper; and then what have I left?
Do you think I can rejoice? I'd give half; I'd give--yes, _the whole_,
not to have Him come these hundred years." She stretched out her thin
hand towards him; but he pushed it back.

"Do you see?" said the angel to me solemnly. "Between him and her there
is a "GREAT GULF _fixed_." They have lived in one house with that gulf
between them for years! She cannot go to him; he cannot go to her.
To-morrow she will rise to Christ as a dewdrop to the sun; and he will
call to the mountains and rocks to fall on him--not because Christ
hates _him_, but because _he_ hates Christ."

Again the scene was changed. We stood together in a little low attic,
lighted by one small lamp--how poor it was!--a broken chair, a rickety
table, a bed in the corner where the little ones were cuddling close to
one another for warmth. Poor things! the air was so frosty that their
breath congealed upon the bedclothes, as they talked in soft, baby
voices. "When mother comes, she will bring us some supper," said they.
"But I'm so cold!" said the little outsider. "Get in the middle, then,"
said the other two, "and we'll warm you. Mother promised she would make
a fire when she came in, if that man would pay her." "What a bad man he
is!" said the oldest boy; "he never pays mother if he can help it."

Just then the door opened, and a pale, thin woman came in, laden with
packages.

She laid all down, and came to her children's bed, clasping her hands in
rapture.

"Joy, joy, children! Oh, joy, joy! Christ is coming! He will be here
to-morrow."

Every little bird in the nest was up, and the little arms around the
mother's neck; the children believed at once. They had heard of the good
Jesus. He had been their mother's only friend through many a cold and
hungry day, and they doubted not He was coming.

"Oh, mother! will He take us? He will, won't He?"

"Yes, my little ones," she said softly, smiling to herself; "He shall
gather the lambs with His arms, and carry them in His bosom."

Suddenly again, as by the slide of a magic lantern, another scene was
present.

We stood in a lonely room, where a woman was sitting with her head bowed
forward upon her hands. Alone, forsaken, slandered, she was in
bitterness of spirit. Hard, cruel tongues had spoken her name with vile
assertions, and a thoughtless world had believed. There had been a
babble of accusations, a crowd to rejoice in iniquity, and few to pity.
She thought herself alone, and she spoke: "Judge me, O Lord! for I have
walked in my integrity. I am as a monster unto many; but thou art my
strong refuge."

In a moment the angel touched her. "My sister," he said, "be of good
cheer. Christ will be here _to-morrow_."

She started up, with her hands clasped, her eyes bright, her whole form
dilated, as she seemed to look into the heavens, and said with rapture:

"Come, Lord, and judge me; for Thou knowest me altogether. Come, Son of
man; in Thee have I trusted; let me never be confounded. Oh, for the
judgment-seat of Christ!"

Again I stood in a brilliant room, full of luxuries. Three or four fair
women were standing pensively talking with each other. Their apartment
was bestrewn with jewelry, laces, silks, velvets, and every fanciful
elegance of fashion; but they looked troubled.

"This seems to me really awful," said one, with a suppressed sigh. "What
troubles me is, I know so little about it."

"Yes," said another, "and it puts a stop to everything! Of what use will
all these be to-morrow?"

There was a poor seamstress in the corner of the room, who now spoke.
"We shall be ever with the Lord," she said.

"I'm sure I don't know what that can mean," said the first speaker, with
a kind of shudder; "it seems rather fearful."

"Well," said the other, "it seems so sudden--when one never dreamed of
any such thing--to change all at once from this to that other life."

"It is enough to _be with Him_," said the poor woman. "Oh, I have so
longed for it!"

"_The great gulf_," again said the angel.

Then again we stood on the steps of a church. A band of clergymen were
together. Episcopalian, Methodist, Baptist, Presbyterian, Old School and
New School, all stood hand in hand.

"It's no matter now about these old issues," they said. "_He_ is coming;
He will settle all. Ordinations and ordinances, sacraments, creeds, are
but the scaffolding of the edifice. They are the shadow; the substance
is CHRIST!" And hand in hand they turned their faces when the Christmas
morning light began faintly glowing; and I heard them saying together,
with one heart and voice:

"Come, LORD JESUS! come quickly!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Note:

Page 8, "wordly" changed to "worldly" (am very worldly)





End of Project Gutenberg's He's Coming To-Morrow, by Harriet Beecher Stowe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HE'S COMING TO-MORROW ***

***** This file should be named 43373.txt or 43373.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/3/7/43373/

Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
