The Project Gutenberg EBook of What's your hurry?, by George Niblo

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: What's your hurry?
       A deck full of jokers

Author: George Niblo

Release Date: August 22, 2013 [EBook #43534]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHAT'S YOUR HURRY? ***




Produced by Demian Katz and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (Images courtesy
of the Digital Library@Villanova University
(http://digital.library.villanova.edu/))










  S&S HUMOR LIBRARY No. 5 PRICE 25 CENTS

  [Illustration]

  WHAT'S
  YOUR
  HURRY?

  A
  DECK FULL
  OF
  JOKERS

  BY
  GEORGE
  NIBLO

  STREET & SMITH . PUBLISHERS . NEW YORK




  What's Your Hurry?

  A DECK FULL
  OF JOKERS....

  By
  GEORGE NIBLO

  Author of
  "B'Gosh!" "Atchoo!" "Step Lively!" etc.

  [Illustration]

  STREET & SMITH, Publishers
  238 William Street, New York




  Copyright, 1904
  By STREET & SMITH

  What's Your Hurry?




WHAT'S YOUR HURRY?


[Illustration]

Sit down! Sit down! Stop right where you are! The game isn't over by a
long way.

I've got a few aces up my sleeve yet, and don't you forget it!

No wonder I'm feeling tiptop! Fact is, I fancy I am feeling to-night a
little like the colored brother who got religion, and filled with
enthusiasm, or something more of a liquid character, expressed to the
doubting parson his desire to imitate Elijah, and go to glory in a
chariot of fire.

"Yes," said the parson, "I reckon, my friend, you'se just want to get
acclimated-like before reachin' de end ob your journey."

Now how did that reverend gentleman know?

Why, only through circumstantial evidence, for you see he had
unfortunately once been the proud owner of a flock of fowls that did
not have sense enough to roost high.

[Illustration]

However, I'm not sighing just yet to go to glory.

This gay metropolis pleases me some.

But, talking of circumstantial evidence, I know one man who would never
consent to hang a suspected murderer on the strength of it.

You won't blame him, either, when you hear what his experience in that
line has I been.

He's a doctor by profession.

His learning has always been in the direction of mind troubles, and
consequently I wasn't surprised when I met him the other day to learn
that he is now in full charge of one of the biggest institutions in the
State, for the care of the insane.

Now, it happened that recently in making a tour of inspection the doctor
had occasion to enter an unoccupied cell in the ward reserved for
incurables.

As he did so the iron door clicked shut, making him a prisoner in his
own asylum.

While he was standing there, rattling the grating and calling for an
attendant, a party of visitors came strolling his way.

"I beg your pardon," said the doctor suavely to the first man, "but I'm
locked in."

[Illustration]

"Poor fellow," replied the visitor, "so I perceive."

"I wish you would be good enough to have some one let me out," the
doctor continued.

By this time a second visitor appeared.

"See," said the first, "this fellow looks quite intelligent, and asks to
be released, as though he really expected it."

"Gentlemen, I see your error. I am not crazy, I assure you. I locked
myself in here by accident. Really--I--why----" and the doctor felt
himself smiling in the most blankly imbecile manner.

"Look at him now!" cried the second visitor. "Did you ever see a more
hopelessly idiotic expression on the face of man?"

[Illustration]

This was really too much for human nature to endure.

"See here, you scoundrels," cried the doctor, excitedly, "call an
attendant or I'll have you both in here for life. I'm the
superintendent."

"Come away," said one of the strangers, quickly, "we musn't get the poor
devil worked up. He may do himself harm," and they passed on down the
corridor.

The doctor spent a morning in that cell, and now he says he has more
sympathy for his patients.

He assured me that if I ever took a notion to drop in and see him, he
would do all he could to make my stay comfortable.

I wonder what he meant, and if that was a mere formula used to calm each
new guest at his hotel.

Long experience has made the doctor quite an artist in that line.

Speaking of artists, there's Craigie, who has a studio on Fifth Avenue.
Craigie is a friend of mine.

[Illustration]

He paints atrocious pictures, but somehow seems to make a living out of
the business.

Sometimes I go to see him, when business is bad, and I'm wondering
where the money's coming from to pay the month's bill.

Between you and myself, the sight of all those daubs on the walls of his
studio, which he considers masterpieces, always makes me feel better.

Misery likes company, and they certainly do look tough.

Recently, while I was lounging there in his Oriental corner, old Dr.
Gregg dropped in.

I expected some fun, because the doctor has quite a caustic tongue, you
know, and don't mind giving a fellow a rap.

Craigie understood why I winked at him, and I saw blood in his eye while
he continued to paint.

The doctor walked around, grunting and making an occasional slurring
remark that in another man might have been looked on as an insult.

But we all knew Gregg.

Finally he turned to the artist.

[Illustration]

"I say, Craigie, these things which you exhibit on your walls, seeking a
purchaser in vain, I suppose may be called failures?"

"Well," remarked the artist, "perhaps you hit the nail on the head in a
commercial sense, doctor. You see, men in your profession have the
advantage over us poor devils of painters, for while we are compelled to
exhibit our failures on the wall, yours are safely planted underground
out of sight."

[Illustration]

When I met Craigie, after he had spent a summer abroad, he delighted me
with his sketches of the many interesting things he had seen.

Among other subjects he had a picture of Monte Carlo.

It is certainly a lovely heaven on earth and I said as much. Craigie
grinned at me.

"All the same," said he, "it has appeared to be a regular hades for many
a poor devil."

"That's so--when a fellow has lost all his money," I admitted.

"Why," said he, "I myself experienced the tortures of the Inquisition in
that room you see yonder."

"What are those affairs in sight?" I asked.

"I played roulette there, and was broken at the wheel."

Although I never went through a similar experience I could sympathize
with Craigie.

Leaving out the wheel part of it, his condition has usually been a
constitutional failing of mine, and was that morning when I called at
the office of the Sunday paper.

[Illustration]

Now, if there is anything I dislike it's to see an editor show his
temper.

Some of them are really too provoking.

So when I happened in and found the man who runs the comic supplement
frothing at the mouth I tried to soothe him.

"Christopher Columbus!" I remarked, pleasantly, after my usual way, "you
seem to be out of humor this morning."

"That's all right," he snarled; "you can't sell me any."

What a husband that bear must be; not domestic, after my own fashion,
for I dearly love to do errands for my wife.

[Illustration]

Of course I sometimes make blunders in shopping, but then experience
teaches one, and in time I hope to be able to hold my own with the
tricky tradesmen who look upon me as a soft mark.

When the mistake is really atrocious I get a good calling down, and
sometimes have to resort to strategy in order to save the day.

The lady of the house was indignant this evening when I came home from
my weary round of the newspaper offices.

"The joke is on you, George," she said.

I wondered which one, for the day had not been productive of much long
green.

"What's it all about?" I asked.

"Why, that mattress I told you to buy."

"Well, I bought it all right," I protested, feebly.

"Yes, and instead of sending home a mattress of live goose feathers, you
purchased one of excelsior."

"How can you blame me, my dear," I said, "when I assure you it had a
placard fastened to it which read 'Marked Down'? That furniture man is a
prevaricator, that's all."

[Illustration]

Those sharks who sell furniture must have some connection with
fishermen, to judge from the thundering big lies they tell.

Now, I am fond of going fishing myself.

Perhaps I take a deeper interest in the whooping big yarns spun around
the blazing camp fire by a set of jolly sportsmen than in the taking of
mighty strings of fish.

[Illustration]

Still, I delight to lure the festive trout out of the wet.

I've met some fellows who like old-fashioned methods, and succeed where
the rest with their expensive tackle fail.

One day I had a remarkable run of luck, and that night as we sat around
the camp fire, I took occasion to say that my success was due to the
superior kind of flies I had used.

"You may flatter yourself on the string you've brought in to-day," said
an old fisherman who had joined our party, "but let me tell you, mister,
that I saw a Digger Indian catch more fish in one hour in this stream
than you've landed all day with your fine flies."

[Illustration]

"What bait did he use?" I asked.

"Live grasshoppers," replied the old man; "but he didn't impale them.
From his head he would stoically pluck a hair, and with it bind the
struggling insect to the hook. Almost upon the instant that this bait
struck the water a fish would leap for it. After landing him the Indian
would calmly repeat the performance of snatching a hair from his head
and affixing a fresh grasshopper to the hook.

"After the Indian had landed in quick succession a mighty string of
salmon trout he suddenly stopped. I called to him to go on with the
exciting sport, but he merely smiled grimly and pointed significantly
to his head."

"What was the matter with his head?" I asked.

"He had plucked it bald," replied the old man.

There have been some occasions when I've felt myself as though I would
like to pluck my hair out, though it is generally on account of some
stupidity on my part.

And if you don't mind I will tell you right here, how.

I put my foot in it the other night.

I was so provoked at my stupidity that I came near retiring to a
nunnery, or taking a solemn vow not to speak a single word for a week.

Now, I haven't an unusually large mouth, and yet when I related my
unfortunate break to Charlie Parsons, the cashier of our bank, he was
cruel enough to hint that perhaps some people never could open their
mouth without putting their foot in it.

[Illustration]

I call that decidedly uncharitable, don't you?

But about this stupid remark of mine.

It was a big reception you know, a mixed company, where one was apt to
meet any sort of an old star.

Some famous chaps were there, too.

I honored it with my presence.

At the table I chanced to sit next to a learned professor, head of a
famous college. And during the meal some fiendish spirit induced me to
turn toward him and say:

"Professor, can you tell me who that uncommonly ugly lady is, opposite
to you?"

He looked at me with a wicked smile.

"Sir," he said, "she chances to be my wife."

[Illustration]

Of course I was overwhelmed with confusion, and to crawl out of the hole
I did what any other person would have done under the same
circumstances.

"Pardon me, professor, but I mean the lady on the right."

"And that, sir, is my daughter," he said, solemnly.

Then I flew the coop.

When I was strolling along the Bowery this evening I saw a man come
jumping out of a museum that boasts of more freaks than Barnum's show.

[Illustration]

"Where's the nearest doctor?" he cried, and from his frightened
appearance I felt positive the human snake had gulped down the bearded
lady, or the living skeleton with the ossified bones wanted a tough
joint pulled, or had got stuck in the wastepipe of the sink.

"What's the matter--anything wrong?" I asked.

"Wrong," he yelled, "I should say there was. Why, the sword swallower
has got a pin down his gullet! Show me a doctor, quick!"

A little further along I saw an Irishman being run out of a clothing
store by an irate Jew, who certainly looked as though he couldn't take a
joke.

[Illustration]

The Celt was laughing when I caught up with him.

"What's up?" I asked.

He pointed to the sign that read:

"Great Slaughter in Clothing."

"Sure," said he, "the gossoon was mad clane through because I wint in
and asked to see one av thim kilt suits," and he laughed so hard that he
choked half to death over a set of false teeth.

Speaking of teeth, that was pretty tough on Snyder when his little son
and heir took to giving away family secrets so recklessly.

It seems that Snyder had been treating himself to a new set of teeth.

The youngster thought the event of sufficient importance to be related
to the minister when he called.

And quite naturally the good dominie, much amused, asked what would
become of the old ones.

"Oh, I suppose," replied little James, with a look of resignation;
"they'll cut 'em down and make me wear 'em."

[Illustration]

Snyder's wife is a good general.

She was riding in the car with her little daughter Edith, when the
conductor, thinking perhaps of a half fare, asked:

"How old are you, little girl?"

"You must ask ma," she immediately replied, "'cause she always takes
care of my age in a street car."

Now that was pretty cute, don't you think so?

And my youngest came up smiling recently.

Really, I am worried about that little chap, because I never know
whether he is going to be a fool or a humorist.

Perhaps it doesn't matter much.

On this occasion he had had his first ride in an automobile.

A fellow around the corner bought one recently, and as he wants to get
in my good graces for some reason or other, he asked Harold to go
through the park with him.

That evening I heard my wife, who is very circumspect in all such
matters of etiquette, say:

"Harold, did you thank Mr. Gaycrank for that lovely ride he gave you?"

Harold was reading but did not answer.

So she asked him again.

I knew he heard from the way he looked up, but was surprised that he
made no reply.

"Harold!" she spoke sharply, now.

"Yes, ma," he replied.

"Did you thank Mr. Gaycrank for taking you riding? Why don't you answer
me?"

"I did thank him, ma," whispered Harold, "but he told me not to mention
it."

[Illustration]

Harold was studying geography.

I saw something puzzled him.

"What's the knotty problem?" I asked him.

"They call the Mississippi the 'Father of waters,'" he said, "and I
think it ought to be the 'Mother of waters.'"

"Correct, my son," I said, admiringly.

"Is Missouri the daughter of Mississippi then?" he asked.

I'm afraid I have much to answer for.

And think of it, that boy only nine years old.

What will become of us when he breaks loose at man's estate?

Just this morning he astonished me by declaring the dictionary was only
an old joke book after all.

I frowned upon such levity.

The dictionary I look upon as an old and valued friend, and one
deserving of the utmost respect.

It has pulled me out of many a difficulty.

"Nonsense, I'll give you a dime for every bona fide joke you show me in
the dictionary," I said.

"All right, here's one already."

[Illustration]

He pointed out the word "question."

Reading further I found this:

"To pop the question--see pop."

Well, I never begrudged that dime a bit. And my respect for that solemn
old conglomeration of knowledge is now mingled with hilarity.

Since I'm in on the subject of young ones, let me tell you that I've
always endeavored to impress my children with the fact that I take an
interest in all they do.

That is, I want them to come to me with all their troubles, and gain by
my checkered experience.

Sort of older brother confidence game, you know.

Once in a while I'm rather afraid they take advantage of my easy-going
character.

There's Aleck, about sixteen, and almost ready to go to college--what
d'ye think he said to me yesterday.

Catching me in a particularly good frame of mind, when a big check had
just come in, he said in a serious tone:

[Illustration]

"Will you advise me, pop?"

"Certainly--only too delighted, my son. Now, what is it you want my
opinion upon?" I said, feeling particularly pleased because of this
confidence.

"Well, you see, I wanted to know whether I had better strike you for
five dollars or for ten?"

There's no use in telling you how much he got, for who could resist such
a clever hold up?

Oh, by the way, did I ever tell you about Jackman?

[Illustration]

Among my friends I suppose he is by long odds the most
consequential--why, he has the strut of a Lord High Admiral in a comic
opera.

That is, when before the public.

Secretly, I believe he leads a sort of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde life, and
that the power behind the throne is in reality his wife, a little woman
with a will of her own.

This was proven to my mind the day I was out with him at his country
seat.

His coachman came up, looking red in the face, as though out of humor.

[Illustration]

"I think I must leave you, Mr. Jackman," said he.

"Why, what's wrong, Thomas?"

"I don't like to complain, sir, but really I can't stand the missus."

"Oh, is that it--she's too strict, eh?" laughed Jackman.

"Yes, sir, she keeps forgetting that I can throw up my job at any time,
and bosses me around just as if I was you, sir."

I thought it good manners to get behind the stable before I allowed
myself to laugh.

But Thomas went all the same.

Jackman told me Thomas had recently got religion and was about the
longest-winded petitioner at prayer he ever knew. But I had been South
among the darkies, and remembered one old fellow, at least, who could
give him points and still win out.

This was old Uncle Mose, who looked solemn enough for a funeral when I
asked him how things were going.

"I declar'," he said, "I got ter be mo' keerful in future--I sho' has!"

"What's the trouble now?" I asked.

[Illustration]

"Well, suh, I whirled in en prayed fer rain dese two hours en a half, en
bless de Lawd, dey come along a regular deluge, dat mighty nigh drown de
bes' mule I had. Prov'dence am so partial ter me, dat I'se got ter be
mo' keerful about overdoin' things, you see."

Uncle Mose had a son who, being a barber, puts on considerable style at
times.

I'd seen him look like a howling swell.

One day, down at the post office, while waiting for the mail to be
distributed, I saw this Adolphus saunter in.

Another young gamecock rubbed elbows with him.

"Hullo, 'Dolphus, you'se ain't been a wearin' dem fine patent-leather
shoes ob yours no mo'. What am de matter?" I heard him ask.

[Illustration]

"Kain't--de patent done run out," said Adolphus.

That fellow was quite good looking, and in fact I can remember quite
enjoying him after a fashion.

I don't believe I've ever been called a handsome man myself.

That is, in a beauty show, the prizes wouldn't be rushing in my
direction.

And yet for years I did cherish the fond belief that my face had the
stamp of honesty and rectitude upon it.

Alas! I'm not so positive now.

To tell the plain, unvarnished truth, I begin to fear this business of
talking on humorous subjects is beginning to leave its effect upon my
frank countenance.

This is how I know.

I had engaged to do a stunt in a certain town down among the North
Carolina pines.

Come to find out, there was no way of getting there except by means of a
stagecoach, just as in olden days.

I was the only passenger, you see.

There had been considerable talk about a rascal who had robbed right and
left, so that I was not feeling very good.

[Illustration]

Besides, I didn't like the looks of that driver, for if ever an
evil-browed mountaineer had taken to coaching, he was the man.

He kept looking back at me every little while, and somehow I got the
notion into my head that he was figuring whether it would pay to make
way with me.

There was an awful lonely stretch of woods between Athens and Saulsboro,
and when we struck it I tell you a cold chill pranced up and down my
spinal column, for it was just an ideal spot for murder.

Suddenly the driver drew in his horses.

My knees began to knock together, and my teeth rattled just like those
Turkish castanets you've seen dancers use.

The worst had come, and this black-browed villain was about to finish me
then and there.

I tried to get to my feet.

"Hold on there!" growled the driver.

His voice trembled, I thought, with rage.

It was the most terrible moment of my life.

"Who are ye?" he next demanded.

I told him my name.

"What ye going to Athens fur?" he asked.

I hastened to inform him that I was the funny man who had been engaged
to appear, my object being to let him know I might be worth more coming
away from Athens than when bound there.

[Illustration]

He put out his big hand, quickly.

I expected to see a big pistol in it, but no, it was empty.

"How glad I am, mister, to hear that," he said. "I've been shaking in my
boots all this yer time thinkin' ye was that land pirate an' meant to
murder me, 'cause they say he's even an uglier cuss than me. Shake
hands, mister. I declar ye've taken a mighty big load off'n my mind."

I shook hands with the delighted fellow, but lacked the nerve to tell
him how badly scared I had been.

But I'm not so proud of my honest looks nowadays.

Whenever I hear a good story in connection with some person of note, I
always enjoy it more if I happen to know the party.

They told me about Richard Harding Davis the other night at the club,
which amused me not a little.

Ever hear of his adventures with the bull?

Well, it runs something like this, and those who happen to be honored
with a personal acquaintance with the famous young American author will
appreciate its point best.

[Illustration]

He was taking a stroll one day, and lost in meditation, so the story
runs, rather incautiously started to cross a meadow where a ferocious
bull was pastured.

The gentleman did not see the bull until he charged, and then like a
true soldier of fortune he dropped his dignity and made headlong for the
nearest fence.

This he reached in good time, but the bull had the satisfaction of
assisting him over.

Though no great damage was done, Mr. Davis' feelings were deeply
injured.

Just then, as luck would have it, the owner of the bellowing bovine came
running up.

He was angry because Mr. Davis had been trespassing on his property, and
Mr. Davis was mad clean through because he was not in the habit of being
assisted over fences in that style.

"I'll have you arrested for trespass, sir," exclaimed the farmer, in a
rage.

"And I'll have you summoned for keeping dangerous animals at large,"
cried Mr. Davis.

"You had no business on my land, sir."

"Ah! perhaps you don't know me; I'm Richard Harding Davis, sir!"
striking his well-known attitude, and tapping his manly breast
significantly.

"Oh," said the farmer, duly impressed, "but Mr. Davis, why didn't you
tell that to the bull?"

I was out in a country cemetery lately.

Ever walked through one?

Sometimes you find some queer epitaphs on the old stones.

I read one that told about the virtues of three husbands a certain woman
had.

And the monument had evidently been touched up several times, as
occasion required.

[Illustration]

This gave me a suggestion which I later carried out in the shape of a
little song, and if you will permit me, I'll sing it to you now. Keep
your seats, there's no extra charge.

The orchestra will please play, softly, the "Dead March of Saul." My
song is entitled "The Overworked Monument."

    She followed him unto his grave
      And reared a marble rare,
    And chiseled on this sentence sweet,
      "My grief I cannot bear."

    She mourned a year and then she wed,
      And they chiseled on that stone
    A single word, and now it reads,
      "My grief I cannot bear--alone."

    But soon she wore her weeds again,
      And they turned that stone about;
    And on it traced this touching line,
      "My life's light has gone out."

    Not long she walked in darkness lone
      Around that marble patch,
    The bells rang out, the sculptor wrote,
      "I've struck another match."

    She's happy now with number four,
      But all the neighbors say
    That she will be a busy girl
      On Resurrection Day.

Some people are very partial to the bang-tails.

[Illustration]

There's Cribber, for example, has become quite infatuated over the
races, and loses no opportunity of going when the season is on.

He stoutly maintains that it is just his Kentucky love for the
magnificent thoroughbreds that lures him there.

And being a confiding sort of a fellow myself I actually believed this
song and dance for a time.

I know better now.

Here's where the bars were lowered.

Cribber has a lovely home, and a devoted wife, who has long been one of
my wife's best friends.

The other day when she was at the house she took advantage of my wife
running upstairs to get her hat on, to put me on the rack.

I was surprised.

What do you think she asked me?

She wanted to know whether the air down on Long Island had malaria in
it, and especially around Sheepshead Bay, where the horses ran.

I assured her that so far as I knew it was considered fully as healthy
as any other part of the shore.

[Illustration]

Then she let the cat out of the bag.

Several times of late after Cribber had been to the races he looked
careworn and cross, and complained that there was something radically
wrong with his system.

I saw a great light.

But I made no attempt to explain matters to the little woman, who
doubtless continues to be worried about the health of that gay old
deceiver, Cribber, and when I told him about it he bribed me to secrecy
with a prize fifty-cent cigar.

To tell you the truth, if there's anything I enjoy it's a prime cigar.

[Illustration]

And like many another man I've had to make myself a martyr each
Christmas, for my better-half invariably insists on buying me a box of
the weeds.

Her intentions are all right, but the cigars--well, they generally bring
back vivid recollections of boyhood days, when corn-silk and grape
leaves all went.

I have come to dread the holiday time.

And yet I never have the heart to dissuade her, she seems to take such
delight in seeing me smoke one of the vile weeds some villain of a
tobacconist sold her as prime stuff.

Now this year I determined to be wise.

Accordingly I managed to slip out of the house and presented the box
with a "Merry Christmas" to Mike McGinnity who lives around the corner.

Then I bought a box of my favorites and smuggled it into the house,
feeling guilty, yet triumphant.

That night Clara, bless her heart, insisted on opening the package and
bringing me the first cigar, which she lighted with her own dear hands.

Then she watched me puff my satisfaction.

It was genuine, I tell you, and mentally I was patting myself on the
back.

"How do you like them, my dear?" she asked, anxiously.

"Prime--as good as any I've ever smoked," I replied, honestly.

[Illustration]

"I'm so glad, for you see I had Mr. Harvesthome pick them out for me.
They cost fifteen dollars for the box of fifty. But I do love to see you
enjoy a good cigar after dinner."

Well, what do you think of that?

Harvesthome is the best judge of cigars I know.

Every time I pass McGinnity he calls out blessings on my head for the
"illegant" box of cigars I gave him.

And I think Harvesthome suspects something.

That will cost me another box to keep him hushed up.

I guess those were about the most expensive common, everyday smokes I've
ever indulged in.

Next year I will bribe Clara to let me help her select the present.

But talking of smoking, I wonder whether it really has any effect on the
nerves, as the doctors claim.

Because, it's been my experience that some of the nerviest chaps among
the rising generation were boys who indulged in cigarettes.

Why, just last week I had occasion to go to a neighboring town down the
coast.

It was confusing to a total stranger, the streets ran at such queer
angles.

So I determined to seek a little assistance.

There came along a sallow youth, puffing away at a cigarette and looking
mighty important.

I held him up.

[Illustration]

"Say, young fellow, can you direct me to the bank?" I asked.

"Guess I kin, for a quarter," he replied, coolly.

I liked his nerve.

At the same time I expressed my surprise over the steep demand he made
for such a trifling service.

"Huh," he said with a grin, "guess you can't expect a fellow to be a
bank director for nothing."

He got that quarter for his smartness.

If only one keeps his ears open on the streets he is very apt to hear
many queer things, and sometimes fragments of humor go floating on the
breeze.

Try it once.

You'll soon realize that after all, this is something of a gay old
world.

Down on Park Row, just as I was passing, an irate customer was hauling a
clothing dealer over the coals.

"Say, Isaacson, you said this suit would wear like iron," I heard the
customer say.

The Jew shrugged his shoulders.

[Illustration]

"Vell, do you mean to dell me it did not?" he asked.

"Hang it, too much like iron. I've only had it a week, and see here how
rusty it's become."

The same day I stopped to gaze at an astonishing picture in front of a
Fourteenth Street museum, where the freaks are on exhibition day and
night.

A wild-looking man came out and hurried away.

He was met by the manager, but broke loose and walked down the street,
evidently out of temper.

"See here," called out the proprietor to the man in the ticket office,
"what's gone wrong with the glass-eater?"

"Oh! he's struck."

"Wants more money, eh?"

"Nope, getting too toney, that's all."

"What's he up to, now?"

"Refuses what we give him--lamp chimneys ain't fastidious enough for his
highness--wants cut glass," said the man in the ticket office.

While I was still smiling about the stuck-up devourer of broken glass, I
ran slap into Godkin, who used to be a neighbor of ours.

Some months back he yielded to the alluring blandishments of the Jere
Johnson tribe of suburban real estate men, and went over in Jersey to
reside.

He certainly looked bad.

His face was pale and his eyes had a far-away expression.

"Old man," I said, anxiously, "what's ailing you? I never knew you to be
sick before. Really, you ought to ask some doctor what's the matter."

"It's no use, I know it only too well. It's quick consumption," he
replied, with a sigh.

I was really distressed.

Godkin, bluff and hearty, was the last man I should ever have expected
to go into a decline.

"Quick consumption!" I repeated, after him, and laying a hand on his
arm, sympathetically.

[Illustration]

"Yes, having to bolt my breakfast in two gulps and hurry to catch the
train for town."

While I was talking with Godkin a nervous-looking man passed us.

He had a lad along with him, and as it was a cold day the boy kept
knocking his hands together to induce circulation.

This appeared to annoy grandpa.

"Tommy, stop rubbing your hands like that. The weather's not cold."

And Young America made reply:

"Well, I ain't tryin' to warm the weather--I'm a warmin' my hands, see!"

I have good cause to remember that day.

It was a red-letter occasion.

I pride myself as being as smart as the next one, and in a long
experience seldom come out at the small end of the horn.

But that day--it was a terrible blow to my pride.

An auction attracted me.

[Illustration]

I must confess that I've a sneaking liking for any stray old bargain
that may be floating around.

I've got an attic full of 'em at home in the country--send 'em down
there so my wife won't laugh at me.

However, up to this day, I don't think I've ever been as foolish about
bidding things in as Mrs. Gerrold, who got a doorplate with the name
Thompson on it, and when I asked what use it could be to her, calmly
replied:

"Life is very uncertain. Who knows, Gerrold might be taken away and I
might marry some man named Thompson, and this would come in very handy."

But I have purchased a white elephant.

You shall hear.

While prowling around in the auction room I ran across a little antique
chest.

It struck my eye as the very thing to keep my papers in, and I thought I
might squander a dollar or so for it when the time came to bid.

When I turned back the lid I found the box half-filled with packages of
papers, some of which looked like deeds.

Of course I was foolish to think of treasure-trove, for who could say
what valuable document a fellow might not unearth among these bundles!

A seedy-looking chap touched me on the arm.

[Illustration]

"I beg pardon," said he, "but I hope you won't bid against me on this
here chest."

"And why?" I asked, getting my back up at once.

"Because, you see, I used to be a coachman for the family, and when they
busted up they owed me a part of my wages."

"Oh, yes, and now you think there may be a bonanza for you here. Well, I
guess the track's free to all, and I've taken a fancy to that chest
myself," I said, firmly.

He shook his head and looked angry.

The box was put up the next thing.

I've often thought that queer.

That fellow hung on like a bulldog, to the extent of his little pile,
but my fighting blood was up, and if I'd been a Vanderbilt I guess I'd
have gone a thousand.

I got it, though.

Locking the chest up I left it while I went to the bank and borrowed the
money, some fifty-two dollars.

[Illustration]

Yes, that was an expensive box.

It seemed so precious that I squandered another dollar and a half hiring
a cab to carry it home.

My wife thought I had been to a funeral.

A little later I was of the same opinion myself.

Those stocks and bonds just brought me twenty-two cents for old paper.

Of course it was a set-up game, and they say a sucker is born every
minute.

That was my minute, probably.

But I am not always such an easy mark.

I dropped into a wholesale shoe house the other day to see a friend.

Several of the salesmen were perched on boxes, taking it easy, for
business had slackened.

"Hello," I remarked, "all pulled for the jury, I see."

"How's that?" asked one.

"Why, sitting on cases," I said.

[Illustration]

Out in front I ran across two excited Hebrews.

"You called me a dead beat," said one, angrily. "You must take dot pack,
sir, or suffer dose consequences."

"I never dakes anydings pack," declared the other, firmly.

"You don't dake noddings pack?"

"Never. So help me shiminy gracious."

[Illustration]

"All right. You vas der man I've been looking for. Lend me a haluf a
tollar."

I hope he got it.

I had no time just then to wait and see, for I had an errand to do
downtown, a very particular one, too, for Gwendoline.

That's my niece, who runs our flat just now.

You see, my brother left his little girl with us while he ran across to
London.

She's a dear little thing, but utterly spoiled.

Once in a while it is up to me to punish her, for I promised Henry to be
a father to his little pet while he was gone.

The other night she was pouting and headstrong, so I set about depriving
her of something she particularly desired.

Result, of course, a deluge of tears.

"It hurts me to see you cry, Gwendoline," I said, in a mournful voice,
"but you understand you can't always have your own way, and do as you
like."

"Oh, uncle," she sobbed, "how can you be so obstinate?"

They're all alike, these women, and bound to gain their ends by hook or
by crook.

And yet sometimes they do have the most remarkable ideas about things.

I was at a reception, and having wandered in the conservatory thought
myself alone, until I heard low voices behind some shrubbery.

Of course a pair of turtledoves had secreted themselves there to bill
and coo--the cooing would end at the altar, but every married man knows
the billing keeps right along.

Pretty soon I heard the happy youth say:

"Dearest, how do you know that you truly love me?"

[Illustration]

And then she answered innocently:

"Why, George, don't you see, ever since I met you I've grown to admire
ears that stand out."

When that girl gets married I don't think she'll need any assistance in
her household work.

We changed help the other day.

I hardly know what to make of the new girl.

Sometimes I labor under the impression that she can be as dense as they
make them across the water.

Then again she makes some remarks that stagger me, and on my life I'm
unable to decide whether she's a fool, or takes me for one.

Her breaks are numerous.

Of course being newly landed she had never tasted ice cream, and as the
first spoonful went into her mouth it came out again with violence, and
tears coming into her eyes, she gasped:

"Howly mither, it do burn!"

[Illustration]

Why, it was only this morning I wanted to consult my wife about
something or other.

Of course she could not be found.

It's always thus.

But I am not the man to complain.

With the determination that has always distinguished my noble line of
ancestry, I started in to search from one end of the flat to the other.

This brought me to the kitchen, where lovely Nora was diligently bending
her back over the washtubs.

"Can you tell me of my wife's whereabouts?" I asked.

She looked puzzled, but only for a moment, and then smiling broadly,
said:

"Faith, to till yees the truth, I do belave they're in the wash, sur."

However, I've run across some things that won't wash.

We had a regular seance one night last week at the house of a great
friend of mine called Harper. It was very interesting.

The professor who conducted the exercises was a genius, and he came
mighty near converting some of the ladies to his extraordinary way of
thinking.

I think Harper's wife was anxious to be a convert.

At any rate I heard her eagerly saying to the gentleman with the long
hair and the occult eye:

[Illustration]

"I have always believed in dreams, professor."

"Ah!" said he, delighted, "then perhaps you too have had some
psychological experience?"

"Indeed, I did--a most remarkable one in particular," she gushed.

"Prophetic?"

"Yes."

"I should greatly like to hear it."

"One night I dreamed that the sky suddenly blazed with light; the
heavens were filled with a thronging host, a trumpet sounded, the dead
arose from their graves, and then a voice shouted: 'Something terrible
is going to happen!'"

"Well?" he asked, "and it came to pass?"

"Why, the very next day our cook left."

[Illustration]

I felt very sorry for the professor--he laughed, of course, but during
the rest of the evening I noticed he fought shy of Mrs. Harper's
company.

And the best of it was that lady actually believed in the realization of
her prophecy.

I know Harper thought it a dire calamity when he had to subsist for a
whole week on provender fashioned after the methods in vogue among
cooking-school graduates.

When he was a little younger Harper used to be quite a clubman.

Habits of his bachelor days were hard to shake off.

I had often wondered how he came to suddenly reform, and when my wife
told me recently, as a great secret, I have come to feel a new respect
for the fertility of resource as shown in the gentler sex.

Mrs. Harper used strategy, where another little woman, less wise, might
have tried expostulation and entreaty without effect, for most men
dislike the tyranny of tears.

I'll tell you what she did.

Before going to bed she drew two easy chairs close together by the
parlor fire.

Then she took one of Dick's cigars and held a match to it, until the
room got a faint odor of smoke.

[Illustration]

Harper casually asked the next morning who had dropped in and looked at
her in a funny way when she said no one.

But he never went out another evening without Mrs. Harper.

Now, I call that as smart a bit of diplomacy as Napoleon ever exhibited
in his campaigns, don't you?

Harper lives in Brooklyn.

This gives him the privileges of a landed proprietor.

Why, think of it, the nabob even owns a reel of garden hose, and when he
comes home weary, in the evening of a hot, dusty day, he can find
relaxation to body and mind by sprinkling the streets in front of his
house.

The first time I was over there, I found him taking a turn at this
thing.

There is a fascination about it, you know.

[Illustration]

At first I joked him unmercifully about it, but wound up by offering to
show him a few stunts in that line which proved how I had graduated as a
past master in the art.

While we were chatting his little boy came along.

He seemed to be in tears about something.

"What's wrong, my son? I thought you had gone with your mother on an
errand," said Harper.

"She sent me home to change my stockings," he blubbered.

"Why, what's the matter with them?"

"They's put on wrong side out."

"Hold on," I exclaimed, "that's easily remedied, if you will permit me,"
and I turned the hose on him.

[Illustration]

That little event brought to my mind the narrow escape I had recently.

Through the carelessness on the part of a gentleman who was
demonstrating the wonderful abilities of his patent liquid fire
extinguisher, my clothes caught fire.

Well, that, you know, is no joke.

Many a poor chap has burned up before he could collect his wits and roll
himself up in a rug.

But I must confess, the fellow who was to blame kept his head, and knew
just what to do.

He slapped a little stream of his magic mixture on me, and before you
could say Jack Robinson, I was saved.

Of course he apologized.

I felt like thrashing him, but, as he was a brother of my best friend,
the pawnbroker, I forbore.

"I'm awful sorry, old boy," he said, "but no great damage is done, and I
hope you're not angry with me."

"No, but to tell you the truth, I feel awfully put out," I replied.

Harper has another boy, about the age of my youngest, and like all
Brooklyn lads he is precocious.

He came in while I was there, crying for keeps.

[Illustration]

"Hello, what's happened?" asked his father.

"Been fightin' again."

"With that Irish boy, I suppose."

"Yep, I'm bound to lick him yet."

"Well, you seem to have come out second best this time. But what's the
use crying--tears do no good," said Harper, thinking to make him more
manly.

"All right," spluttered the boy as well as his cut lip would allow him,
"but I guess if you'd gone and got whaled you'd blubber, too."

Harper was telling me about Jerry's experience at school. Jerry is the
little chap who put his stockings wrong side out that afternoon.

I thought it was rather a joke on Harper, though he refuses to look at
it that way.

Well, the teacher gave each of the little kids a good, big healthy word
to write down.

Then they were expected to look up the definition in the dictionary, and
write out a complete sentence containing it.

[Illustration]

Jerry, he was given the word "anonymous," without a name, and when the
teacher read what he had written on his strip of paper, she thought it
was worth the while to send it to Mr. Harper for denial.

This was Jerry's sentence:

"The new baby at our house is anonymous."

Still that was unintentional humor.

Nothing delights me more than to accompany a friend on some afternoon
excursion to the country.

This is especially true if he chances to be thinking of finding a house
in the suburbs.

Recently I performed this sad rite with Hollingsworth, a legal friend of
mine.

Among other places where he took me was a town in Jersey which I dare
not name for fear of being lynched.

At any rate it was a dead herring.

Once a boom had set in, and streets were laid off in the most
extravagant fashion, but for years the place had been going to the bad.

The real estate man had exhausted his resources, and as a last card he
said, desperately:

"But you certainly must admit that the town is well laid out."

"Oh! we agree you've done the proper thing," I remarked. "When a town is
dead it's only right to have it well laid out."

That real estate man was offended.

But then levity at a funeral is, I suppose, out of place.

There was a dentist in the town who seemed to have a little ambition,
for he planted a sign in front of his office bearing the legend:

"Teeth inserted for five dollars."

"I call that dear," I remarked.

"How so?" asked Hollingsworth.

"Why, I've got a brindle dog out in the country that I'll guarantee to
do the job every time for nothing."

[Illustration]

While that real estate man was showing us the beauties of the broad
fields we made an unfortunate acquaintance with a gentleman cow.

Run--well, we did that everlastingly.

But the bull caught up with poor Hollingsworth.

I expected to see him gored to death.

That was when I forgot he was a lawyer, and used to holding every
charge.

He clutched Mr. Bull by the horns, and I hardly knew whether to laugh or
be frightened when I actually saw him riding the beast.

Finally he was assisted over the fence.

[Illustration]

We hurried to him, anxious to learn whether he had been injured
seriously.

Beyond a few scratches, and a tear or so in his garments, he seemed to
be all right.

Of course I warmly congratulated him on his abilities as a prize
bull-baiter.

He was a little dazed--I guess you would have been, too, after such a
warm experience.

"Say, am I awake--was this thing the genuine article or did it only
exist in my imagination?" he asked.

I thought of how he rode that all bovine like a Centaur, and hastened to
reply:

"Well, if it wasn't real, it's certainly a striking example of a man
being carried away by his imagination, that's all."

On the way home after that trip, Hollingsworth was quite gay.

I've often wondered whether it came from his being so well shaken up by
the bull, or because he had successfully evaded the snares of that smart
real estate agent.

"Did you notice it was a colored man who gave our friend Joblots his
letters at the post office?" he asked.

I replied that I had been surprised to see that the residents of a town
in Jersey had a negro postmaster.

"Oh! he's only an assistant. But you'd be surprised still more if you
realized his real character."

"Would I?"

"Because everyone knows he's a blackmailer."

"That's serious, isn't it?"

"And it isn't the worst, either."

"Why, he must be a hard citizen--what else does he do?"

[Illustration]

"Joblots says his wife takes hush money."

"Bribery, eh?"

"You see, she's one of the nurses at the orphan asylum."

By the way, before I forget, I want to tell you about a man I met this
morning. He followed the funniest profession you ever heard of.

He appealed to me for help, saying times were hard and he could find no
employment at his profession.

"What are you?" I asked him.

"An oculist," he replied.

He looked so seedy that I was surprised.

"An oculist, eh? How do you make that out?" I asked.

"I take the eyes out of potatoes," he said.

Well, I got him a job as scullion in a beanery.

He had the whitest hair and mustache you ever saw, and told me it had
come in a night through a scare, that he nearly died from fright--now do
you believe that?

Of course you do.

Why, more than once you've seen an old widower's hair suddenly turn from
gray to black about five months after he buried the partner of his joys
and woes, and he didn't dye from fright, either.

[Illustration]

Say, did any of you people ever strike a prohibition town?

Any of you that have done so will sympathize with me, for I had a
terrible experience of that sort when on a tour last winter.

To save my life I couldn't get anything stronger than Sparrowvinatis;
that's a drink they have in those freak towns.

Well, sir, I spied a braw Scotchman selling tickets at a theatre door.

I gloated.

I made a bee line for him.

I plagued him with questions until he was the maddest man in the United
States.

Then I went away feeling better.

[Illustration]

Yes, friends, if you ever get stranded in a temperance town, do as I
did, stir up a little hot Scotch.

It'll do you good.

I went to a dinner in that same town.

One fellow proposed a toast:

"May the trade of this town always be trodden under foot!"

Drunk? Oh, no, he wasn't drunk. You see they had a dozen big carpet
manufacturies there, and----

Dear, dear, dear! Why, here's a hole in my coat. That puts me in mind of
Sunday school--you know we learned long ago when we were good little
boys and went to Sunday school, that the prophet rent his clothes. I
guess he must have been a poor man and couldn't afford to buy 'em.
That's nothing against old Elijah, is it?

Say, did you ever get up against the first-class lunatic who is forever
telling us about the city man's smartness and the country man's
dullness?

Let me tell you an experience of mine that gives the lie direct to such
an idea.

It happened one night as I was standing near the ticket box of a swell
Eastern theatre.

The play was "The Forty Thieves."

A big, raw-boned Jerseyman strode into the place, as though he had made
up his mind to squander some of his hard-earned cash in order to see the
really gorgeous performance.

[Illustration]

Sliding up to the box office I heard him demand one of the best seats
and laid down a five-dollar bill. A coupon and three dollars was handed
to him. When he asked what the ticket cost and was told that it was two
dollars, it was evident that he expected to pay half a dollar at most.

"Two dollars to see the forty thieves, eh?" he repeated.

"Yes, sir," said the box-office man.

"Well, keep your durned seat," exclaimed the man from Jersey. "I don't
think I care to see the other thirty-nine."

Then there's the elevator boy in our apartment house, who was born and
brought up in the city.

He had a little flag pinned on his coat, and I was joking him on his
patriotism.

[Illustration]

"What have you ever done for your country, Bill?" I asked.

Would you believe it, that urchin had the nerve to look me wickedly in
the eye and say:

"Well, I guess I've raised a good many families, sir."

On the train I met a man I used to know.

After we had been chatting about generations a while, I asked:

"How about that wedding out in your town that I saw mentioned in the
papers--did it come off without a hitch?"

"Well, I guess so."

"Everybody pleased, of course, as usual?"

[Illustration]

"Everybody nothing, everybody as mad as hornets, you mean. The groom
didn't show up, the bride got screeching hysterics, and the father's
been prowling round with a shotgun ever since," said my friend.

"But see here--you said it went off well?" I broke in.

[Illustration]

"No, I didn't. You asked if it went without a hitch and I assented, for
how could there be a hitch without the bridegroom."

But, say, I must tell you about being in court the other day.

The smart lawyer had the witness in hand, and it appeared to be his plan
of campaign to impeach the man's testimony, by showing what a bad
citizen he was.

"Now," said he, very deliberately, "will you have the goodness in
conclusion, Mr. Gallagher, to answer me a few questions; and be pleased
to remember, sir, that you are on your oath, and have sworn to tell the
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth."

"Certainly, sor," replied the witness, whom I thought an honest-looking
fellow, though hardly smart enough to hold his own against a lawyer's
search-light methods.

"Now, Mr. Gallagher, we have reason to believe that at the present time
there is a female living with you who is known in the neighborhood as
Mrs. Gallagher. Kindly tell the jury if what I say is true?"

"It is, sor."

"Ah! yes, and Mr. Gallagher, is she under your protection?"

"Sure."

"Now, on your oath, do you maintain her?"

"I do."

"And have you ever been married to her?"

"I have not."

The lawyer smiled just here, with the proud consciousness of having
rendered that man's testimony not worthy of being taken into
consideration.

"That is all, Mr. Gallagher, you may step down," he said.

"One moment, please," remarked the opposing counsel; "with the
permission of the court I would like to ask a question."

"Granted," said the judge.

"Mr. Gallagher, remembering that you are on oath to tell the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth, be pleased to state the relation
which this objectionable female bears to you."

[Illustration]

"She's me grandmother, sure," said Gallagher.

In Central Park I saw a policeman wheeling a baby carriage, with the
little cherub sound asleep inside.

Possibly the nurse had eloped with another copper, and this chap was
taking the abandoned infant to the station that it might be claimed.

[Illustration]

"Why are you arresting a little child like that?" I asked the officer.

"Kidnaping," he said, with a grin, pointing to the slumbering baby.

Don't look round but let me whisper. There's an ancient couple at the
back of the hall enjoying a basket-lunch. That's what I call combining
pleasure with lunch. Now at the place where I dine we do things
differently. There we combine business with lunch. The legend over the
portals of the restaurant reads:

"Business Luncheons."

[Illustration]

I suppose they make that candid announcement because it's anything but a
pleasure to make way with what they serve there.

The other day when I dined there the waiter came round and asked:

"What are you going to have?"

"I guess a beefsteak--but see here, waiter, not a small one. I'm that
nervous to-day every little thing upsets me."

"Pardon me for asking, sir," said the waiter, between the courses, "but
what's made your eye black and blue? Perhaps you've been having a little
affair with the gloves."

"Yes," I replied, carelessly; "I've been going through an operation at
the hands of a knockulist, that's all."

Then I turned my attention to the roast chicken, which reminded me of
another affair.

You shall hear it.

Teddy O'Toole, who gave me so much amusement last summer while I was
sojourning in a mountain town, has been at it again, I hear.

He is a sad case.

What do you think, his last trick was but to play good old Father Ryan
for a dinner.

Let me tell you the ingenious way the graceless scamp went about it.

First of all, being hard set by hunger, what does he do but steal a fat
young fowl from the priest's henyard.

Having wrung its neck he presented himself before the reverend father,
looking sadly repentant.

[Illustration]

"What now, Teddy?" asked the old man, who was growing weary of wrestling
with the devil as personified in the vagrant.

O'Toole, with his head hanging low, confessed that in an evil moment he
had stolen a fowl, and then, stung by the lashing of his conscience, had
come to confess his wrong.

The father, of course, began to lecture him.

Then Teddy, as if desirous of doing penance, offered the fowl to his
reverence, which shocked Father Ryan more, and he added to his words of
reproach.

"But faith, phat shall I do with the burrd at all?" asked Teddy.

"First, return it to the owner."

"Indade and I've done the same, and be me sowl he's actually refused to
resave the purty creature."

"That is strange, and complicates matters. Stay, there is one other
chance left. Find some poor widow who is in need, and present her with
the wretched bird."

"And thin will ye confess me?" demanded Teddy.

"Of a surety, since the good deed will have balanced the evil one,"
returned the priest.

So away posted that miserable sinner to the house of the Widow McCree,
and she only too gladly cooked the bird, since she had the fire handy.

[Illustration]

Thus pooling their resources they fared merrily.

And I am told on good authority that Teddy, determined to do the thing
up as it should be, presented himself before the priest on the same
evening, related how he had given the fowl to a poor widow in need, and
received absolution as meekly as though he might be but an erring saint
instead of a scheming sinner.

His pranks always amuse me.

Though on more than one occasion I've found the laugh didn't seem to
come quite so spontaneously, when the joke was on me.

This happened on a recent occasion.

I thought I had enough common sense about me not to be caught by such a
picayune piece of tom-foolery, but no doubt at the time my mind was
wrestling with some of the weighty questions that daily beset a
professional man.

At any rate I fell an easy victim.

And I feel foolish every time I think of the affair.

There were seven gay boys in Snyders when I entered, and having seen me
coming, through the glass door, they seemed to be engaged in serious
discussion.

"Here he is now--he can settle the argument himself," said Tom
Radcliffe.

"What's it all about?" I asked, innocently.

"Why, Craigie here said you understand German, and I told him he was
badly mistaken, and that I didn't believe you could translate five words
of it."

"Oh! well, I don't pretend to be a scholar, but I've rubbed against some
Teutons in my day, and may say without egotism that I've conversed in
German," I replied, for it rather galled me to have Radcliffe say that.

"Bosh!" exclaimed my detractor, "I've an idea the simplest sentence
would stump you. Say, what does 'Was wollen Sie haben' mean, anyhow?"

"Why, what will you have?"

[Illustration]

"Scotch for me," said Radcliffe, and the others said that would suit
them to a fine point.

But I don't believe they would have caught me so easily if cares of
state had not occupied my mind--you see I was sitting on a new
scientific joke, and waiting for it to hatch.

Talking of science, I've found that it pays a man to keep right up with
the times.

By observing small things he is able to increase his reputation among
those who read less.

Let me prove this to you.

When that eclipse of the sun came I was down among the mountains of
North Carolina.

The district was a wild one, and they made considerable moonshine
whiskey round there, too; but as I received no salary from the
government for looking after these mountain-dew men, I shut my eyes to
their little game.

You see I hadn't forgotten all the trouble they gave my friend Bill Nye
when he retired to these North Carolina wilds to make up his funny
books.

It occured to me that I might have some fun with the ignorant darkies
over the eclipse.

[Illustration]

So, meeting old Uncle Lisha the day before, I told him how his chickens
would all go to roost before noon on the following day.

Of course the old fellow was incredulous, and just as I supposed,
circulated my prophecy round.

Well, now, I'm telling you there were some pretty badly scared darkies
in that section when it began to get dark about eleven o'clock.

[Illustration]

And the fowls perched high all right.

I never passed a cabin after that, but every inmate ran to the door and
gaped after me in dumb admiration.

It was a great temptation to pose as a wizard, but I was wise enough to
forbear.

Something sudden sometimes happens to wizards and other objectionable
people down in that country.

Why, I remember one day seeing a poor woman sitting outside her door,
and crying while she dipped snuff.

"What's the matter?" I asked.

"They's took my old man an' rided him on a rail," she said.

"That's bad."

[Illustration]

"An' then they done tarred and feathered him."

She wept copiously at the memory.

My tender heart beat in sympathy with her.

"My good woman, I'm really sorry for you. It must have been terrible
hard," I said.

"It were," she cried. "They done took my best feather bed."

But to return to the eclipse.

A few days later I ran across Uncle Lisha again, and he took his hat off
very humbly.

"Well, did it all happen as I said, uncle?"

"'Deed an' it did, sah, jest to de letter. 'Scuse me, but did I
understan' you to say, sah, dat you knowed all about dat ting for a long
time back dat it would happen?"

"Why, yes, quite a while, uncle," I replied.

"Mout it a ben as much as a yeah, sah?"

"Oh, two of them I'm certain," I replied, carelessly.

"Dat am shore a powerful queer ting," said the old man, scratching his
head in perplexity as I rode on, "case, you see, sah, dem chickens waunt
eben hatched den, and yet you knowed it all. Powerful strange."

I might have talked all week and that old fellow would never have
understood.

I like to go househunting with my wife.

[Illustration]

Of course we keep on living in the same place, but then she has a
periodical desire to better our condition.

The last time we were out a relative of hers who has always lived in
Jersey, mistress of her own lawn and with plenty of room to swing a cat
in her house, accompanied us.

It was very funny.

That dear little woman gave the heartache to many a lordly janitor
before we wound up the day.

Her remarks were so refreshing.

Now, at the very first place we examined I heard her give utterance to a
genuinely feminine squeal of delight.

"Why, isn't this just too cute for anything--the dearest little linen
closet I ever saw. Now, this is what I call sensible," she said,
enthusiastically.

"Excuse me," said the agent, coldly, "but that is not a linen closet,
lady; that's the dining-room."

After that I watched Mrs. Suburb eagerly, for somehow I conceived the
idea that she was in for a good time.

At another place there were limited accommodations, and when my wife
talked of putting Aleck to sleep in the parlor on a wire couch, I
entered my solemn protest.

[Illustration]

"The boycott is a relic of barbarism," I declared; and that settled our
chances of taking that flat.

Talking about flats and moving, puts me in mind of the long ago, when I
was a merry, light-hearted bachelor, not caring a rap what the day
brought forth.

Little I bothered myself about the price of spring bonnets or how the
crops promised.

Each day was sufficient unto itself, and brought its joys and
difficulties, but the tatler never weighed heavily.

I've raised a family since, and my credit is still good.

Thank you, I appreciate your encouragement, but one experience will
probably be quite sufficient for me.

Now, during these halcyon days of yore, I remember there was one dear
old lady who seemed to take the greatest interest in my welfare.

I often met her in the street, and she would even stop to chat with me
at times.

One day I was looking in at a shop window.

[Illustration]

I had a cigar box under my arm.

Just then, as luck would have it, the old lady came up and greeted me.

She gave me a reproachful look.

"I'm afraid you are smoking too much for your health. I never see you
now, without a cigar box under your arm," she said, in her motherly way.

"Oh, it isn't that, I assure you," I hastened to declare, "but the fact
is, I'm moving again."

And speaking of those days, puts me in mind of a little thing that
happened to me about that time.

I was working as a reporter then, and the managing editor complained
that my material was quite too far stretched.

That is, he said I cost them too much money in telegraphic tools, and
desired me to condense the details.

[Illustration]

They could do all the romancing at the office, for we had men especially
employed for that purpose, who, given a few facts for a foundation,
could build up the most astonishing account imaginable.

Indeed, I've known them to describe things better than the fellow who
was on the spot could have done.

That's genius, you understand.

Well, I laid low and awaited my opportunity to boil the next account
down in a manner certain to please this grand mogul.

The opportunity came.

There was some sort of explosion on a big vessel over at Philadelphia,
and as our regular correspondent there chanced to be ill, I was packed
off to get special news.

"Be as quick as you can. Wire us hard, boiled-down facts as soon as you
get hold of 'em. Leave details to the office. Perhaps you'll be in time
for the noon edition."

That's what the managing editor said.

I spared no expense in hurrying to the spot, and before eleven-twenty
sent this brief telegram:

[Illustration]

"Terrific explosion. Man-o'-war. Boiler empty. Engineer full. Funeral
to-morrow.

                                                               Niblo."

It would be hard to beat that for brevity. I believe in brevity, even
when a man is proposing to his best girl.

Now there has always been considerable curiosity manifested by my
friends, who know my humorous instincts, to know just how I ever popped
the question.

They declare, the chances are, I must have done it in a joke.

Of course this doesn't refer to any lack of estimable qualities in my
wife, but simply that a fellow of my character could not possibly do
anything seriously.

I have determined to relate the facts in the case, and they can judge
for themselves.

You see, we had been down to the seashore together, and, for the life of
me, I couldn't muster up courage enough to ask her the all-important
question.

She gave me an opening at last, though perhaps no one but a born
humorist could have seen it.

Out on the rocks stood a gay old lighthouse, which seemed to possess
unusual interest in the eyes of the young woman.

"It must be a lovely thing to live in such a weird place. Sometime,
before I die, I hope I may keep a light house. I believe it would be
lovely, don't you?" she said.

Now, to tell the truth, the idea never occured to me before, but when
she spoke of it I saw my chance.

[Illustration]

"My dear girl," I said, "if I had only known that you cared for light
house-keeping, I would have spoken before this. Let us discuss the
matter; what's the use waiting until long in the future, when the
opportunity presents itself now."

And the result was, we pooled our issues, hired a couple of rooms,
bribed a minister to say a few words, and kept house in a light way.

Since that time we've had our ups and downs.

But I've never felt toward my better half as that old bear Podgers must,
with regard to the partner of his joys and woes.

[Illustration]

He rode down with me in the elevator yesterday.

We had been having a little domestic trouble, and the lady in the
kitchen had wafted herself away.

This sometimes makes a man sad, especially if his wife is seized with
some of her old-time enthusiasm and joyously declares she will look up
those recipe books, arranged at the time she went to cooking school.

I knew I was in for another dose of dyspepsia and had on my part been
trying to remember the dozens of patent medicines to which I had given a
trial on the last occasion, and which of them had been least injurious.

Of course, man-like, I poured my woes into the ear of Podgers, hoping
for sympathy.

"Do you have any trouble keeping a cook?" I asked.

He laughed in a cold-blooded way.

"Not in the least--not such good luck, my boy. You see our cook has a
lien on the place. She's my wife," he said.

[Illustration]

Well, I wouldn't have said that, no matter what I thought.

But then Podgers always has been considerably henpecked at home, even if
an arrogant chap downtown.

Sometimes he makes me think of the meek little fellow I saw recently in
court.

He was a witness.

"Well," remarked the judge, "have you anything to say?"

Then the witness looked fearfully about him, like one long accustomed to
knowing his place.

"That depends," said he, "upon circumstance. Is--er--my wife in the
room, judge?"

[Illustration]

While I am speaking of marrying let me tell you about a fellow I once
knew.

His name was Steiner, and he set himself up in business as an
international marriage broker.

You see, these matches between broken-down foreign noblemen and wealthy
young American girls gave him an idea that he might make a nice dot.

In due time he was employed by a German count to secure an heiress for
him.

The arrangement was that Steiner was to receive ten per cent. of the
young lady's estate for arranging the match.

This looked like a snap, always providing Steiner should succeed in
finding the heiress, and bring about an understanding.

[Illustration]

Well, he found the girl with the ducats all right, but his price went up
like bounds, until, not content with ten per cent. of the estate when a
marriage was brought about, he asked for the whole shooting match.

Yes, and he got it, too.

How was that--why, just as easy as two and two make four. Steiner
married the heiress himself.

Funny how one thing arouses a train of thought.

My wife brought home a curious Dutch stein after one of her shopping
excursions, and I never looked at that affair without thinking of a
certain graveyard out in Western New York.

Let me tell you how that happens.

While visiting a friend, he took me to see the sights of the place, and
quite naturally we strolled through the churchyard.

There were lots of old-timers buried there, and some of the inscriptions
quite interested me.

Presently we came to a new tombstone.

[Illustration]

I noticed that above the inscription there had been cut a single hand,
with the index finger pointing upward.

It seemed appropriate enough to me, and I was astonished when my friend,
after bending down to read, actually laughed.

"Well, I declare," he said, presently, "if that isn't just like old
Stein. He never did order more than one beer at a time!"

To the very last he was attached to his bier.

I remember it was in this same cemetery I ran across a funny old darky
who seemed to be examining several traps which he had set.

Of course, my curiosity being aroused, I began to fire a few questions
at him.

If you ever want to find anything out, the best way is to ask the why
and wherefore.

What do you think he was after?

Rabbits, of course.

Then I remembered that down South it was all the fashion for darkies to
get the foot of a graveyard rabbit, and carry it around with them; they
look on it as a sure thing to keep bad luck away.

[Illustration]

I thought I might convince the old fellow of the absurdity of such
mummery.

"See here, uncle, I'm afraid you're a bit superstitious," I remarked.

"'Deed I isn'," said he, shaking his white head. "Some folks is a skyaht
of ghosses an' all kin's of critters; but as long as I have a rabbit's
paw in mah pocket I feels puffickly safe."

[Illustration]

After that I couldn't say a word.

In fact, I felt as though speech were denied me, as it is some
unfortunate fellows.

If you ever ran across a man with a genuine impediment in his speech,
well, you know how painful it seems to watch him nearly strangle in the
endeavor to make himself understood.

Advice is wasted on such a man.

I remember trying it once, only to get the cold laugh.

Here's the story in verse.

Listen!

    "Oh, be not hasty, friend?" I cried,
      "Think twice o'er all you utter."
    "I'm bound to do so," he replied,
      "I stut-tut-tut-tut-tutter."

And I never hear any one carrying on in that way, but what I think of an
old Irishman, a farmer who dropped into the office of a country weekly,
run by a friend of mine.

"Sit down, Mr. Dooley," said my friend, the editor.

Mr. Dooley took a chair.

"By the way, Mr. Dooley," said my friend, "you have sent me a load of
hay in payment for the five years' subscription you owed me for my
paper."

"Oi d-d-d-did," declared Mr. Dooley, nodding pleasantly.

"Well, to tell you the truth, Mr. Dooley, my horse can't eat that hay."

Mr. Dooley screwed up his face, and puffed out his cheeks until I
thought he would have a fit.

[Illustration]

"T-t-t-to tell ye the t-t-truth, mister, no more c-c-can m-m-me
g-g-go-go-goat e-e-eat your p-p-p-p-p-paper."

I don't know which was hotter, Mr. Dooley or the editor, when they
finished their argument.

You realize there are various methods of warming a man up--for instance,
at my hotel one evening a bell-boy came to the desk, after answering a
call, and said:

"That fellow up in 999 says he's freezing."

"All right," said the clerk, cheerfully, "we'll soon have him hot
enough. Here, take him up his bill."

[Illustration]

I've got a great friend, Henry Badger by name, that I must tell you
about.

I hardly know whether to admire the monumental nerve of Henry Badger, or
class him as a near relative of the jackass tribe.

You may not know it, but his neighbors have long been aware of the fact
that his good spouse ruled the roost with an iron rod, and Henry's
former buoyant spirit has all but withered in his breast.

Why, he used to strut the streets with all the pompous airs of an
alderman, while now he shuffles along as though he owed ten tailors on
the block.

It is awful, the change made in that man.

Once in a while I understand there is a faint glow among the embers, and
a trace of his old-time spirit flashes up, though it is gone almost as
quickly.

That must have been the case the evening I was there.

Henry had been reading the evening paper, where many black headlines
announced the exciting events of the day.

"One wife too many," I heard her say, sarcastically; "that must of
course refer to the doings of another rascally bigamist."

"Not necessarily, my dear," returned Henry, without daring to take his
eyes off the paper.

I held my very breath with awe.

But Mrs. Badger, after shooting him one quick look, probably decided
that it was a blank cartridge.

[Illustration]

Badger, when her back was turned, actually gave me a wicked wink behind
his paper.

On the whole, I guess there's a little of the old spunk left, but it
will never set the river afire.

Badger told me once, he and his wife ran away and got married by a
justice of the peace.

If you never witnessed a civil marriage by an alderman, a mayor, or some
such officer authorized to deal out bliss in double harness, well, you
don't know what you've missed, that's all.

The first time a magistrate has to officiate upon such a happy occasion,
one can hardly blame him for being kind of nervous.

A good fairy sent me to the office of a friend, who is a justice, and it
happened he was tying his first double knot.

Having been duly coached, he opened the proceedings all right, and
fancied he had plain sailing.

The woman had been duly asked whether she would take the aforesaid man
to be her husband, and as that was the identical reason why she was
there, she hastened to say that she had no objections, and at the same
time took a firmer hold on his arm, as though determined not to let him
get away from her.

[Illustration]

Then the magistrate turned to the groom and pierced him with his eagle
eye.

Perhaps he was so accustomed to having appeals made to him in his
official capacity, that it came very natural for him to remark:

"Prisoner at the bar, what have you to say in your defense."

At the same time I thought it rather hard on the young man, but he came
up to the scratch smiling and proved an alibi.

A magistrate's office is a good place for picking up humor, but it
doesn't compare with the den of an installment book agent.

The manager of the office was hauling a candidate for a position over
the coals while I waited for an interview, and quite a few amusing
tidbits floated over the top of the partition.

"Ever done any canvassing before, Mr. Jones?"

"Well, I worked a year in a Chicago house where they packed hams for the
market."

[Illustration]

"You are a little hoarse this morning--I hope your voice is reliable,
for you'll need it in this business."

"That's all right, the neighbors think I got a good voice--they all
advised me to go abroad and study."

"You complained of having the toothache--will that prevent you from
carrying on business?"

"Not at all, sir. You see it's a holler tooth."

By the way, this same manager of the Book Agents' Supply Company has a
most decided aversion to all department stores.

He declares they are ruining the country.

That there is no longer a chance for a young man to set himself up in
business, and so forth.

You've heard the changes rung up on that story.

Possibly there's more or less truth about it; but we've got to face a
condition, not a theory.

Well, Babcock carries his hatred so far that he detests the very sight
and name of the department stores. His wife has the strictest
instructions not to purchase anything whatever at these pernicious
paradises, and, therefore, when he returned to his home early one day
last week and discovered a parcel of groceries on the hall table which
bore the hated imprint of Swindell & Getrich, great and tremendous was
his virtuous wrath.

His knife was out in an instant, and in another the various packages
were ripped up, and condensed milk, eggs, tea, sugar, and the sultanas
were mixed together in a fearsome heap on the linoleum.

"Why, what are you doing, Henry?" said his wife, entering at that
moment.

Rip, went another packet of Scraped Nutshells for Scraggy Nonentities,
and whizz went its contents.

[Illustration]

"I'm teaching you a lesson, madam!" he roared. "Teaching you to obey my
instructions not to deal at this store?"

"Why, Henry," said the lady, "they don't belong to us at all. Mrs
Jenkins, next door, has gone away for the day, and I promised to take
them in for her."

And Babcock had to subdue his spleen, allow his wife to hie away to the
hated department store and duplicate the whole Jenkins' order.

He is also a singular man, in that he will not allow himself the
pleasure of a good cigar.

Some men would make good Mohammedans, for they always seem trying to
deny themselves the good things of life--a sort of crawling to Mecca on
their knees.

Why, what do you think, while Babcock and myself were sauntering through
Central Park recently, up runs a smart little urchin, and sings out:

"Box o' matches, sir?"

"No," said Babcock, loftily, "don't smoke."

[Illustration]

"Well," remarked the boy, sympathetically, "if you'll buy a box,
guv'nor, I don't mind teachin' yer."

As we sauntered along we came upon a diminutive girl who was wheeling a
perambulator, in which was a very young child.

As the vehicle was being pushed dangerously near the edge of a somewhat
steep curb, I was alarmed, and ventured to faintly remind her that the
little one was in danger of being thrown out.

[Illustration]

The girl looked up in my face, and, in a tone of utter and complete
indifference, replied:

"It don't matter, mister; it ain't our kid."

And it was on the same afternoon that I saw an amusing mix-up, as well
as had my recollection of a life upon the ocean wave revived.

An old salt, who had apparently learned to navigate a bicycle fairly
well, was working his wobbly way along one of the paths in the park,
when, before our eyes, he collided with a lady wheeler.

[Illustration]

It was awfully funny, I'm telling you, now.

Fortunately, there was no personal damage, and he hastened to murmur his
excuses.

"I'm sure as I ought to be scuttled for it, mum," he said,
apologetically, "but I couldn't get your signals no more as if we were
feeling through a fog bank. I was blowin' for you to pass to port an'
steerin' my course accordin'. Just as I was going to dip my pennant an'
salute proper, your craft refused to obey her rudder, an' you struck me
for'ard. Afore I could reverse, your jib-boom fouled my starboard mizzen
riggin', your mainsail (skirt) snarled up with my bobstay, parted your
toppin' lift, and carried away my spanker down haul. As I listed to try
to jib, I capsized, keel up, an' put you flounderin' in the wreckage. I
hope you'll forgive me, mum, and let's start off fresh, on a new tack."

[Illustration]

Now, I liked that old tar.

He was a square-rigged man, and ready to accept what the gods sent him.

That's my style.

I've got my faults, but kicking isn't one of 'em, you bet.

[Illustration]

You'll always find me at the same old stand, ready to take things as
they come--but please be a little careful about the antiquity of the
eggs, because, you see, I've got my best clothes on.

Now, if the orchestra will kindly wake up and give us a little music,
I'll try and sing a song which I have called "No Kicker Need Apply."

Hold on, professor, you want to be sharp. I expected you'd be flat, so I
guess you'd better compromise and only be natural.

Well, then, here goes:

    Guess I've been about as lazy as the civil laws allow;
    Know blame well I've been as lazy as I could be anyhow;
    Never liked t' do th' milkin', never liked t' heft a hoe,
    Never liked to plow or harvest, never liked t' reap ner sow.
    Never was much good at nothin' that my daddy put me at,
    But I've never been a kicker, an' I'm bloomin' glad o' that.

There isn't any chorus to this song, so glide right along to the second
verse, professor. Here you are.

    I've been called a triflin' beggar, I've been called a shif'less
         slouch;
    I've been called some things that hurt me, but I never hollered "Ouch!"
    I've left undone a heap o' things I started out to do,
    An' I've had my share of headache--yes, I've had my share, f'r true;
    But my upper lip's kep' stiffer'n any board ye ever see,
    Fer I've never been a kicker, an' I'm never goin' t' be.

    I've seen days when clouds was hangin' over ev'rything in sight;
    I've seen times I wished t' goodness, morning wouldn't foller night;
    I've felt kicked an' snubbed an' slighted--though folks didn't mean it
         so,
    An' I've had to blink an' swaller for t' make my smiler go;
    But I made it work, by ginger, and I'm thankful for it still--
    Fer I've never been a beefer, an' you bet I never will.

    I've been watchin' folks that hollered till they's purple in th' face,
    Claimin' that their nat'ral enemies was all th' human race.
    Kep' on noticin', and purty soon their guess was blame near right,
    For they al'ays was commingled in some sort o' gen'ral fight.
    Thankful I don't see things that way, though I'm not no haloed saint;
    But I've never been a kicker, an' I'm mighty glad I ain't.

[Illustration]

Thank you ladies and gentlemen.

I knew the noble sentiments expressed in those verses would take your
hearts by storm.

And please forbear showing your appreciation by the customary liberal
supply of ancient hen fruit, tomatoes, and cabbage flowers.

I want you to understand that this is no donation party.

You doubtless saw that I was a little horse--in other words, that I have
something of a colt this evening.

Now, I'm pretty good at making excuses myself, but I give the cake to
Reddy Moriarty.

You see, he's a fellow working on the subway, under an old friend of
mine, a Maj. Dickerson.

Just while I was interviewing the contractor the other morning, who
should come along but Moriarty.

The foreman was mad clean through, and I thought only Reddy's ready
Irish could save him from a hauling over the coals.

[Illustration]

It did the same, by the powers.

"Nine o'clock!" snarled the foreman, "what d'yer mean by coming at this
time of day? It's a wonder a man of your independence troubles himself
about coming at all. Now, then, what's your excuse?"

Moriarty considered a moment, and at last the excuse came.

"Sure, sor," he said, "I dramed last night I was at a baseball match,
betwane the giants and the Champions, that ended in a tie. So the umpire
ordered extra innings to be played, and, begorra, sor, I only stopped to
see the finish!"

Moriarty was once a pilot.

"Faith," says he to me, "time was when I piloted all kinds of ships
into harbor, but I've redooced it all down to a system, and the only
sort I take over the bar now is schooners sor."

[Illustration]

But I musn't forget to tell you about my friend, old Dr. Raggles.

I always refer to him as "that old war horse." You'd know why, if you
cast your eye over that last bill he sent me. As a charger he'd be hard
to beat.

The doctor took a day off recently and ran up to a country town to see a
family horse that was for sale.

He tried the beast, fancied him, paid a stiff price for the outfit, and
rode off happy.

Three hours later he came back mad.

"Look here, sir!" he yelled, "this darned old horse won't do for me. He
shies. I can't get him to cross the bridge."

[Illustration]

"That's why I sold him," said the dealer. "Didn't I advertise my reasons
for selling him?"

"Yes; 'to be sold,' you stated, 'for no other reason than that the owner
wanted to get out of town.'"

"Well," says the dealer, "if you can get out of town with him, it will
be more than I can do!"

Say, I went on the road with a post office inspector last year.

First post office we struck, a big, strong Irish woman was behind the
counter.

"Ahem!" said the inspector. "I thought a man was in charge here!"

"Begorra, ye're roight, he was," said the lady; "but Oi married him, an'
Oi'm in charge now. Pfwat is it yez want?"

She was a Tartar, I tell you.

[Illustration]

I wonder what Mr. Man was doing. Maybe he had the cradle to rock.

I was in jail last month. Oh, only as a visitor, of course. I needn't
explain that. Went the rounds of the cells with the governor of the
State.

Well, we struck one man who was the homeliest specimen of humanity I've
ever seen.

"What are you here for?" says the governor.

"For runnin' away with a woman, yer honor!" says the man.

[Illustration]

"Bless my soul!" says the governor, "is that so? I must send you a
pardon. I don't see how a man so homely as you could ever get a wife
unless he ran away with one."

A cage or two farther on was occupied by a big, husky chap.

"What are you here for?" says the governor.

"I'm here for my health, governor," says the man.

"How's that?" asks the governor.

"Well, you see, I had six wives, governor."

[Illustration]

Well, no pardon dropped in on that chap.

He had seized just six times his share.

A few more like him and the women wouldn't go around.

Jiminy Christmas! There's the gong of my auto. My chaffeur's getting
impatient. Yes, my time is up. I got ten dollars advanced on it
yesterday.

[Illustration]

Good-night!




Transcriber's Notes:


The copy used as the basis for this digital edition was missing its back
cover, so some advertising is omitted.

Some questionable spelling (e.g. occured) has been retained from the
original.

Page 12, added period after "stopped."

Page 39, added period to first sentence on page.

Page 41, changed "neice" to "niece."

Page 50, added missing apostrophe to "Jerry's."

Page 63, changed "repentent" to "repentant."

Page 67, changed "forebear" to "forbear."

Page 75, changed "couse" to "course."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of What's your hurry?, by George Niblo

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHAT'S YOUR HURRY? ***

***** This file should be named 43534.txt or 43534.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/5/3/43534/

Produced by Demian Katz and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (Images courtesy
of the Digital Library@Villanova University
(http://digital.library.villanova.edu/))


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
