The Project Gutenberg EBook of Mary's Little Lamb, by Edith Francis Foster

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Mary's Little Lamb
       A Picture Guessing Story for Little Children

Author: Edith Francis Foster

Release Date: September 24, 2013 [EBook #43808]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARY'S LITTLE LAMB ***




Produced by Katie Hernandez, Jason Isbell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was made using scans of public domain works in the
International Children's Digital Library.)





Transcriber's Note: This book is heavily illustrated. The
illustrations that do not have captions have been removed in the text
version; they are retained in the HTML version.




    Marys Little Lamb

    A PICTURE GUESSING STORY
    FOR LITTLE CHILDREN

    BY
    EDITH FRANCIS FOSTER

    WITH 500 PICTURES BY THE AUTHOR

    [Illustration]

    SALEM MASS
    SAMUEL EDSON CASSINO




CONTENTS


    FRONTISPIECE
    DEDICATION
    HOW MARY FOUND HIM               9
    HOW THEY WASHED HIM             15
    HOW THEY FED HIM                21
    HOW HE WENT TO SCHOOL           27
    HOW HE WOULDN'T JUMP            33
    HOW LITTLE MARY SPUN            39
    HOW HE WENT BOATING             45
    HOW DOLLABELLA TOOK A RIDE      51
    HOW BOSSY BUNTED HIM            57
    HOW THEY PLAYED HIDE-AND-SEEK   63
    HOW HE SAVED MARY!              69
    HOW HE WON A PRIZE              75




Copyright, 1901, By S. E. Cassino.

Copyright, 1903, By S. E. Cassino.




    TO
    LITTLE AUNT HANNAH
    (ON HER
    NINETY FIRST BIRTHDAY.)




[Illustration: HOW MARY FOUND HIM.]


[Illustration: MARY'S LITTLE LAMB.]


I

When little Mary Moffett's mother asked her to go up to the Clover
Farm for some fresh [eggs], Mary felt a little sorry, for she was very
busy making her [doll] a [dress], but she laid down her [thimble] and
[scissors] and [yarn], tied on her pink [bonnet], and set off up the
hill, with her little [basket] on her [arm]. As she was coming home
she heard a queer little patter, patter, behind her. She looked back
and saw something white! [Mary] felt a wee bit afraid, and began to
run but her [foot] struck a [stone] and down she tumbled on her
[nose]! Before she could get up something soft and woolly was rubbing
gently against her [face], saying "Ba-a-a!" "Oh you darling lamb!"
cried Mary, hugging it--and the little [lamb] snuggled close, and said
"Ba-a-a! Take me home with you, little Mary." [Mother] was
astonished. "Whose lamb is it?" she asked. "Oh Mother, I think it's
just a wild lamb! Mayn't I keep it?" begged [Mary]. But Mother said
she must ask Farmer Clover if it was one of his [sheep], first. So
back they went, and found Farmer Clover mending his [fence] and Mary
asked him. But there were two big tears in her [eyes]--she did so want
that dear [lamb]--and the kind old [man] saw them. "Well, yes," he
said, "that's my lamb--but it's an extra one, that I haven't any room
for. If I knew anybody who would be willing to take it and treat it
well--" "Oh, Mr. Clover!" cried [Mary], her eyes dancing, now, and her
[feet] dancing, too. "_I'd_ be willing! _I'd_ treat it well! May _I_
have it?" So Mary and the little [lamb] went dancing home together.
And kind old [Mr. Clover] watched them and laughed till his [axe]
danced in his [hand], and his [glasses] danced on his [nose].




[Illustration: HOW THEY WASHED HIM.]


[Illustration: MARY'S LITTLE LAMB.]


II

"Mother! Mother!" cried little Mary, running into the [house]. "Mr.
Clover says he doesn't need this [lamb]--it's extra--and I may have it
for my very own!" Yes, now it was Mary's little lamb--and how they
loved each other! They went together everywhere--in the [house] and
the [barn], and over to Grandfathers, to play with little Aunt Hannah.
Mary's Aunt Hannah was only three years older than [Mary] herself and
they played together all the time. The two little [girls] thought the
[lamb] was beautiful, but it was not very clean. "I don't want a
dirty, dusty little lamb," said Mary; "I want a nice, clean, white
lamb." "Then we must wash it." said little [Aunt Hannah]. "Father
washes all his [sheep] in the [river] every spring." Out by the [barn]
stood the [faucet] with the big wooden [trough] where the [cows]
drank. The [trough] was full of water, standing in the [sun]. Mary
leaned over the edge and dipped her [hand]. "It's nice and warm," she
said. "Now, dear little [lamb] jump right in!" But the lamb wouldn't
jump--so Mary and little Aunt Hannah lifted him, and dropped him into
the [trough]. Then they rubbed him with [soap], and squeezed his [fur]
with their [hands]. The poor little lamb didn't like it, and kept
trying to get out--till, as [Mary] tried to hold him her [foot]
slipped and in she fell, [head] first! Oh, how she screamed! And [Aunt
Hannah] screamed, too, and the [lamb] cried "Ba-a-a!" as loud as he
could. Little Aunt Hannah's mother came running from the [house]
fished them out of the water, and carried them into her [living room]
one under each [arm]. There she rubbed them dry, wrapped them both in
[towels] and set them by the [fireplace], to get warm.




[Illustration: HOW THEY FED HIM.]


[Illustration: MARY'S LITTLE LAMB.]


III.

Mary's lamb was too young to eat [grass], as old [sheep] do. He wanted
milk, but he did not know how to drink from a [bucket]. He was just a
baby sheep, you see. So Mary's [mother] found an old tin [teapot] and
filled it with warm new milk. Then she tied a [cloth] over the
[spout], and [Mary] held it while the little [lamb] sucked up every
drop of the milk. Three times a day they filled the [teapot], and he
drank it all, while Mary tilted it up for him. One day [Mary] and
little [Aunt Hannah] went up Clover [Hill] to pick [berries] for their
mothers to put in [pies]. They took their luncheon in the
berry-[pail], and each had a tin [cup] to pick into. Mary's [lamb]
went too, and of course he would want his luncheon, so [Mary] carried
the old [teapot] in a [basket]. When the [pail] and [basket] were
full of [berries], they started home. Along the roadside grew white
[flowers], and they made a [wreath] for the lamb's [neck]. Then Mary
said "The [sun] shines so, he must be hot. He shall wear my [bonnet]."
So they tied it snugly over his [ears]. Then they sat under a [tree]
to finish their luncheon, and afterward Mary gave the [lamb] the rest
of his milk. Two [women] came past, in a low [carriage], and they
laughed to see the little lamb drinking from the teapot. Mary did not
notice that one [woman] held up a little black leather [camera] and
pointed it at her. But next week a flat, square [package] came from
the postoffice marked "For the Little Girl and Lamb who live near
Clover Hill." [Mary] cut the [string] with her [scissors], and
unfolded the [package]--and what did she find inside it? A beautiful
photograph of herself, feeding her [lamb] by the roadside!




[Illustration: HOW HE WENT TO SCHOOL.]


[Illustration: MARY'S LITTLE LAMB.]


IV.

Mary didn't like to go to school and leave her lamb at home. She knew
he would not be happy all alone; and how could she study her [books]
and do sums on her [slate], without her dear little woolly [lamb]
close beside her? But schooltime came, and she had to start. If she
had looked back, she would have seen the [lamb] trotting along behind,
all so pretty, with a blue [bow] on his [neck]. He loved to follow
little Mary, and he didn't know [lambs] mustn't go to school. Before
he caught up with her, the [bell] rang, the [children] all ran in, and
the [door] was shut; but he stood on the door-[step] and heard them
singing. Then the arithmetic class began, and the [teacher] said:
"Mary, if you had three [apples], and gave one [apple] to Hannah, how
many would you have left?" Mary was not thinking of [apples].
"Four," she said, "but please teacher, did you know I had a [lamb]?"
and the lamb heard her voice and called "Baa!" outside the [door], as
loud as he could. "Why, there he is!" cried [Mary]. "He must go home,"
said the teacher; and she opened the [door] to send him away. But the
little [lamb] came right in, and ran to [Mary], so glad to see her
again! "Oh, please let him stay!" said she: "I am sure he will be
good!" But all the other [children] laughed--it was so funny to see a
lamb in school--and the [teacher] had to turn him out. But the [lamb]
would not go home. He wanted to stay near Mary; So he waited on the
[step] and every time he heard her voice he cried "Ba-a-a!" At last
the [teacher] said [Mary] must take him home; so she put away her
[books], and the little [lamb] jumped and danced, he was so happy, as
they ran home together.




[Illustration: HOW HE WOULDN'T JUMP.]


[Illustration: MARY'S LITTLE LAMB.]


V

All the week the little lamb had to stay at home while Mary went to
[school]; but on Saturday they had such good times! First, [Mary] had
her tasks to do. She wiped all the [cups] and [plates] and [spoons],
dusted the [chairs] and made her own [bed]. Then she went out to play.
The nicest place to "play house" was the [roof] of a [hut] by the
[barn]. Mary and little Aunt Hannah climbed up by the [fence], with
their [dolls] and [tea set] but the [lamb] couldn't climb. They tried
to carry him, but he was too heavy--and he kicked, too. So they took
him up on the [straw] in the [barn] and dropped him out of a [window]
onto the [roof]. Then they all had a good time playing "party", with
some caraway [biscuits] and a little [jug] of milk. But at noon,
when Mary's Mother blew the dinner-[whistle], the lamb couldn't get
down! They couldn't lift him up to the [window], and he was afraid to
jump to the ground. Little Aunt Hannah stood on the [wheelbarrow], but
could not reach him. Then they brought out armfuls of [straw] and made
a big soft [haystack] and [Mary] stood on the [roof] and tried to push
him off into the [straw] but he wouldn't budge. "Come to dinner,
children," called Mary's [Mother]. "It is getting cold." "Oh dear!"
said little Mary, almost crying. "He'll have to stay up here and
starve! But he's had three [caraway biscuits], anyway." At last
[Hannah's] big brother came out to find them. He laughed when he saw
the [lamb] and the [haystack] but he went for a [ladder], and very
quickly brought the little [lamb] safely down to the ground. Then they
all went in and had their dinner together.




[Illustration: HOW LITTLE MARY SPUN.]


[Illustration: MARY'S LITTLE LAMB.]


VI

"When my lamb is big enough" said Mary to little Aunt Hannah, "my
father will shear him with the [clippers], like the old [sheep] and
Mother will teach me to spin, and knit the wool; and so my little lamb
will give me my [gloves] and [socks]." "Let's shear him now." said
[aunt Hannah]. "I can teach you to knit." "Well." said Mary. "He is
very little--but we will only take a little of his [wool]." So she got
the [scissors], and they cut some wool from his [back]. But they
found it must first be spun into [yarn]--and they didn't know how: so
they went to ask Mary's [mother]. She laughed at the poor little
[lamb] with the big bare spots in his pretty white [fleece]. "If you
are in such a hurry for [gloves] and [socks]," she said, "we will
begin them at once. First, you must learn to spin." So she brought
out the big [spinning wheel] and some tiny soft [threads] of wool and
showed her how to spin the rolls into [yarn]. Mary liked to walk
backward and forward, and twirl the great [spinning wheel] with a
[clothes-pin]; but her yarn was all uneven, and kept snarling and
breaking. Soon she grew tired--and cross, too, and then the [yarn]
snarled worse than ever. As last [Mary] gave the [spinning wheel] a
great whirl, as hard as she could, and ran off to the [barn]. There
she hid in the [straw] and cried, until the little [lamb] found her
and rubbed his [head] against her [hair]. Then she stopped crying to
laugh, his ragged [fleece] looked so funny! Pretty soon she went back
to the [house] and said she was sorry for being cross. Then [Mother]
gave her a nice [ball] of yarn and some [knitting needles] and [Aunt
Hannah] taught her to knit a [sock].




[Illustration: HOW HE WENT BOATING.]


[Illustration: MARY'S LITTLE LAMB.]


VII

When the time really came to wash and shear the [sheep], Mary's
[father] said the lamb wasn't big enough to spare any more [wool]--but
he did get washed in the [river]. Mary and little Aunt Hannah went
down in the meadow to gather cowslips--not for the pretty [flowers]
but to boil in a [pot] for dinner. They took off their [shoes] and
[socks] and splashed about in the wet [grass], filling their [bucket]
with [cowslips]. They picked some tall blue [flowers] too, and pulled
sweet-flag to eat. To get the sweet [flag], they had to cross a little
[bridge] over the brook. The [lamb] followed them, but he stepped on a
loose [board], and it tipped him off into the water! It wasn't deep
enough to be over his [head], but he waded the wrong way and scrambled
out on a little [island] in the middle of the [brook]. They
couldn't coax him to wade ashore;--he didn't like water, and would
only shake his [head] and say "Ba-a-a! No-o-o!" "We must build a
[bridge] for him" said [Mary]. "No," said [Aunt Hannah] "we will get
the boat. The [boys] keep it at the mill." They followed the brook up
to the [mill] and untied the [boat]. There were no [oars], but they
found a long [pole] and pushed it along to the [island]. The little
[lamb] was very glad to jump in with them. But they could not push the
[boat] ashore, for the water ran too fast. So they floated along,
dipping their [fingers] in the water, and watching the little [fish]
swimming below, till they ran into a [fence] across the brook. Then
they climbed ashore and went back for their [bucket] and [shoes and
socks]. "Oh, you funny lamb!" said Mary, "What good times you do make
us have!"




[Illustration: HOW DOLLABELLA TOOK A RIDE.]


[Illustration: MARY'S LITTLE LAMB.]


VIII

Dollabella, Mary's biggest doll, had had the measles, but she was
getting better. "When people get better" said [Mary], "they always go
to ride." So she tried to give her [doll] a ride on the [lamb]'s back,
but he danced up and down and she fell off. Then Mary took a [string]
and tied her on, so when the [lamb] danced again he couldn't shake
[Dollabella] off. He didn't like that, so he thought he would run away
from her, and off he went! The [gate] was shut, but he squeezed
through a gap in the [fence], and tore Dollabella's [dress] on a
[nail]. Mary squeezed through the gap, too, and her [skirt] caught on
the [nail], and tore a great big three-cornered [hole]. The [lamb] ran
across a field and jumped over a [stone wall] into the [bushes] and
Mary ran after him, laughing. Dollabella's [hat] fell off her
[head], and so did Mary's [bonnet]. The [branches] of the [trees]
caught her [hair] and tangled them and almost pulled the [doll] from
the lamb's back. At last they came out into a [wheat]field and saw
Farmer Clover at work with his [hoe]. "Hello!" said he. "Who's running
away--you or your lamb?" "Oh, we aren't running away," said [Mary],
all out of breath. "We are just giving my [doll] a ride. She is sick!"
"Well, that's a pretty fast ride for anybody that's sick!" said
[Farmer Clover]. "Now I am going to the [barn], to get a [jug] of
molasses. Don't you want to ride home in my [buggy]?" Mary and the
[lamb] were tired, and glad to have a ride--and I think the poor sick
[doll] must have been just as glad. But when they got home [Mary] had
to take a [sewing needle] and [thimble] out of her [basket] and mend
her [dress] and Dollabella's too.




[Illustration: HOW BOSSY BUNTED HIM.]


[Illustration: MARY'S LITTLE LAMB.]


IX

As the lamb grew big and strong he got very frisky, too. He found out
that when he ran at things with his hard little [head] down and bunted
them, the things would fall down. He thought that was funny, so he
bunted everything. In the [house] he bunted over [chairs] and the
[shovel] and [tongs], and nobody dared set a [bucket] or [tub] on the
floor. Outdoors, he ran at the [hens] and [chicks], to see them
flutter and scream. Once he bunted little Aunt Hannah's [cat]--but she
didn't fall down; she stood up and cuffed him with her [paw], and
scratched him! But [Mary] fell down when he bunted her, and so did
[Hannah], although they were bigger than the [cat]. One night he ran
at Mary's father, bringing in the [pail], and spilled all the milk
over his [boots]. Then Mary's [father] said if the [lamb] didn't
stop bunting he must be tied up. So [Mary] tried to teach him better,
but he didn't understand it was naughty, and kept right on bunting. At
last one day, he bunted the [cow] which was tied to the [fence] by a
long [rope]. Now Bossy liked to bunt, too; so when the [lamb] ran at
her she put her [head] down and ran at him! And she was the biggest,
so it was the little [lamb] himself that fell down that time! First he
flew right over the [fence] and fell on his [head],--then he rolled
over and over into the duck-[pond]. All the [ducks] began to flap
their [wings] and quack, and the big gray [goose] hissed at him and
chased him. The poor naughty little [lamb] was so frightened that he
ran to [Mary], all wet and muddy, and hid his [head] in her [dress].
After that, he didn't bunt things any more!




[Illustration: HOW THEY PLAYED HIDE AND SEEK.]


[Illustration: MARY'S LITTLE LAMB.]


X

One day Mary and her lamb were playing in the [barn]. He would lie
still as a [mouse] while she buried him in the [hay], but when she
clapped her [hands] he jumped up and ran to her like a [dog]. Then
[Mary] began to pull out [hay] from the mow, and made a deep hole
where they could both creep in out of sight. After supper they played
hide-and-seek with [Hannah]. So many nice hiding-places--under the
[flower]-bushes, behind the rain-[barrel], and around the [wood] by
the [woodshed]. At last [Mary] remembered her hole in the [hay] and
crept in, with the [lamb] which followed her everywhere. Then they
waited, keeping very still, till by and by [Mary] grew sleepy--for it
was almost [bed]-time. She laid her [head] on the [lamb]'s soft neck,
as they cuddled down together in their [nest], and before they knew
it they were fast asleep! [Hannah] hunted and hunted, till she thought
[Mary] must have gone in the [house], to play a trick on her; so she
went into her own [house] a little vexed. [Bed]-time came and her
[Mother] came to the [door] to call Mary in. "I guess she's gone home
with Hannah," said [father], as he came from the [barn] with his
[lamp]. The [girls] often slept together, and Mary's mother didn't
hear the "I guess," so she only said "It is naughty to go without
telling me. She mustn't again." So nobody knew where [Mary] was, all
night! But next morning she didn't come home--she was not at
[Hannah]'s--and how frightened everybody was! They hunted everywhere,
and at last started to drive to the neighbor's [houses]. The noise of
the [carriage] and of the [horse] trampling on the [street] waked
Mary--and how astonished everybody was, when she and the [lamb] came
creeping out of the [hay]!




[Illustration: HOW HE SAVED MARY!]


[Illustration: MARY'S LITTLE LAMB.]


XI

Once little Mary and her lamb really did get lost--and something
dreadful almost happened! They had been picking [berries] in the
[bushes] up Clover [hill], and couldn't find the way out. The [sun]
was setting, and [Mary] thought of [snakes] and [bears]! She was tired
and hungry, too. She was eating [blueberries] from her [pail], and
crying, and the [lamb], who would not eat [berries] and wanted his
milk in the old [coffeepot] was crying, too--"Ba-a-a!"--when a big,
tall [boy] with a [rifle] in his [hand] broke through the bushes
behind them. He sat down on a [stump] and stared at them, looking so
white and scared that [Mary] felt sorry for him. "Did a [bear] chase
you?" she asked. "Oh no," said he, "It's only I'm so glad you are
alive!" He didn't dare tell her he had mistaken her little brown
[head] bobbing among the [leaves], for a [bird], and raised his
[gun] to shoot it when he saw a little white [lamb] bobbing beside it
and stopped to look closer! So her little [lamb] had saved Mary's
life--but she never knew it. "Now how came you up here?" the boy
asked. "Are you lost?" "Oh no," said [Mary], winking away the [tears],
and smiling; "We aren't exactly lost--only we can't just find our
[home]. And we want our supper, too." "You shall have it!" said the
[boy]. "You are little Mary--I know your [house]--and I'm going to
carry you there, quicker than a [horse] can trot!" So he took [Mary]
in one [arm] and the [lamb] in the other, and the [gun] he left hidden
in the [forest] under a [tree]. Then he quickly found the [road] (it
was close by, after all,) and in ten minutes they were safe home
again; and Mary's [mother] thanked the big [boy] and gave them all
some supper.




[Illustration: HOW HE WON THE PRIZE.]


[Illustration: MARY'S LITTLE LAMB.]


XII

Now Mary and the big [boy] with the [gun] became great friends. He
used to bring her [candy] in his [satchel]; once he took her out in
his [boat] to gather [flowers]; and he promised to take her to the
County Fair. Early on that day he came for her with his [horse] and
[carriage]. Mary was all ready, in her new [hat], with [bows] on her
[shoes]. "Where is the [lamb]?" he asked. "[Father] says he mustn't
go," said Mary sadly, "so I shut him up in the [barn]". "Oh but he
must go!" cried the [boy]. "He's entered--they expect him." [Mary]
didn't understand that, but she was very glad to take her dear [lamb]
with her. They walked about the Fair grounds and saw the [horses] and
[cows] and [sheep] and [pigs] in the [pens]; and visited the [tent]
where the [rabbits] and [chickens] were, in their [cages]. And
everywhere that [Mary] went the [lamb] kept close beside her; and
all the [people] looked at them and smiled. At last the [boy] said,
"Now we are going into the [exhibit hall] so we will leave our [lamb]
in this nice little [pen] beside all the other [lambs] to wait for
us." They looked at the [fruits] and [flowers] and the [quilts] and
[preserves] in the [exhibit hall]. Then they found Marys [father] and
[mother] and had dinner together; and afterward they saw the [horse]
race, and the [hot-air balloon] go up, and heard the [marching band]
play. It was a long time before they went for the [lamb]. Some
[people] were looking at him, and just as Mary ran up they fastened a
blue [ribbon] on his [head]. "Oh, thank you! How pretty!" she said.
"Hurrah!" cried the [boy]. "Our [lamb] has won first prize! That means
he's the best [lamb] in town!" "Of course!" said little [Mary]. "He's
the best [lamb] in the whole [world]!"





End of Project Gutenberg's Mary's Little Lamb, by Edith Francis Foster

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARY'S LITTLE LAMB ***

***** This file should be named 43808.txt or 43808.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/8/0/43808/

Produced by Katie Hernandez, Jason Isbell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was made using scans of public domain works in the
International Children's Digital Library.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
