                    KITTY'S PICNIC AND OTHER STORIES




This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license.



Title: Kitty's Picnic and other Stories
Author: Anonymous
Release Date: October 22, 2013 [EBook #43999]
Language: English
Character set encoding: US-ASCII


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KITTY'S PICNIC AND OTHER
STORIES ***




Produced by Al Haines.




[Illustration: Cover art]




[Illustration: 'KITTY SAT AT THE WINDOW.'--_Page_ 7.]




                             KITTY'S PICNIC

                           And other Stories


                          _WITH ILLUSTRATIONS_



                           EDINBURGH & LONDON
                      OLIPHANT ANDERSON & FERRIER




[Illustration: headpiece to Contents]


                              *CONTENTS.*


Kitty's Picnic
Ellen's Letter
That Dear Duck
Little Miss Muffle
A New Red Riding-Hood
Lilla's Doll Show
Selina and her Doll


[Illustration: tailpiece to Contents]




[Illustration: headpiece to Kitty's Picnic]


                           *Kitty's Picnic.*


It was a fine spring morning, and Kitty sat at the window looking out at
the green fields and the trees with their young leaves, and far, far
beyond these to some towers that looked small in the distance, but when
you came close to them you found that they belonged to a grand old
castle in ruins.

This castle Kitty had long wished to see, for she had heard so much
about it; and to-day she was thinking very much about it, for she knew
that there was going to be a great picnic, to which her cousins were
going, and Kitty wished she were going also, but she had not been
invited.  As she gazed out of the window she saw several carriages full
of people on their way to the picnic.  Then the tears came into Kitty's
eyes, and she dropped the book she was holding in her hand, and opened
the window so that she might see the carriages more clearly.  They were
going very quickly, and Kitty could hear the people laughing and talking
as she watched them out of sight.

She gave a great sigh.

'How much I should like to go!' she said, half aloud.

Just then the door opened, and her Uncle George walked into the room.

'Why, Uncle George, where have you come from?' said Kitty, jumping up.
'I thought you were not coming home till next week.'

'I came home last night,' said Uncle George, 'but I did not expect to
find you here.  I thought you would be going to the picnic.'

'I should like to go,' said Kitty, 'but I was not invited.  I do not
know Mrs. Somers.'

'Neither do I,' said Uncle George; 'but suppose we have a little picnic
of our own, Kitty?  I have got my dog-cart at the door, and there is
room in the castle grounds for a dozen picnic parties; and we should not
take up much room.'

Kitty clapped her hands.

'Put on your hat, then, and we will go,' said Uncle George.  'My little
Kitty shall see the castle, and climb the ruins.'

'Oh, Uncle George, how good you are!' said Kitty, as they drove along.
'I never thought I should be so happy as I am to-day.'

'But, Kitty,' said Uncle George very gravely, 'I am afraid it can't be
quite a picnic, for we have brought nothing to eat with us. What shall
we do?'

'I shan't mind,' said Kitty; 'but I am afraid that you will be hungry,
Uncle George.'

Uncle George smiled.

'Well, we won't be starved, Kitty; there is a nice little country inn
close by, where I put up my horse, and I daresay we shall manage to get
something there.'

And so they did; and Kitty saw the old castle, and when she drove home
she said it was the happiest day she had ever spent.


[Illustration: tailpiece to Kitty's Picnic]




[Illustration: headpiece to Ellen's Letter]


                           *Ellen's Letter.*


'You must be sure to write it all down, Jessy,' said Ellen, looking over
her sister's shoulder: 'you must tell how naughty Bob was, and how he
threw your doll on the fire, and all the wax melted, and that he broke
my doll's arms and legs, so that I have had to sew them all over to keep
the bran from running out.'

[Illustration: 'YOU MUST BE SURE TO WRITE IT ALL DOWN.']

'Yes--and how he trampled on our gardens, and broke down my rose-bush
and all my pinks.  I don't think I shall have room for all the things
there are to tell mamma about him.  There never was such a naughty boy!
When he gets one of his tempers he does not seem to know what he is
doing.'

And Ellen leaned down on the table, and went on writing.

Just then the door opened, and Bob himself came in.  He was a fat, rosy
little boy, and he did not look very fierce now; indeed, he looked quite
meek and gentle.  He came up to his sisters, and said, 'Bob is sorry; he
won't spoil dolls and gardens again.'

'Ah! it is too late now, Bob,' said Ellen; 'you have spoiled everything;
and I am telling mamma all about it in my letter, so she won't bring you
the baker's cart and the whip that you wanted.'

You are a very naughty boy, Bob,' said Jessy, 'and I am not going to
play with you again.'

Bob went very red.

'Take care; he's going into a temper again,' said Ellen, as Bob made a
snatch at the letter she was writing.  She held it out of his reach, and
then he gave a loud scream and began crying with all his might.

'I'll go to nurse!' he cried, rushing out of the room, shouting as loud
as he could.

'He is the worst boy that ever lived!' said Jessy.

'Now we'll get on with the letter,' said Ellen.

But just then they heard another scream--which was not Bob--and then a
bumping noise on the stairs.

'He's fallen down-stairs.  Perhaps he's killed,' said Jessy, turning
pale. And the two girls ran to see what was the matter.

Yes, Bob, in his passion, did not see where he was going, and he
slipped, and fell from the top of the stairs to the bottom.

'Oh, nurse, is he much hurt?' cried Ellen, for nurse and the rest of the
servants were there.

It was a long time before Bob came to himself.

The doctor was sent for, and he found that Bob's arm was broken; and
poor Bob had to suffer a great deal of pain in having it set.

'Poor Bob!' said Ellen to Jessy; 'we won't send our letter to mamma.'

'No,' said Jessy; 'it will be a great trouble to mamma to find poor Bob
so ill.  We will not give her any more trouble.'  And she tore up the
letter.

But another letter was written to mamma to tell her what had happened,
and she came at once.

Bob was lying quite still, muttering something to himself, but only loud
enough for Ellen and Jessy to hear the word 'Naughty, naughty.'

'But we did not think you would fall down-stairs, Bob,' said Jessy.

Bob looked up at Jessy, and said, 'No, no; naughty Bob, not naughty
Jessy.'


[Illustration: tailpiece to Ellen's Letter]




[Illustration: headpiece to That Dear Duck]


                           *That Dear Duck.*


'Yes,' said Farmer Jones, looking down at them over the top bar of the
gate, 'you may come and play in the field for a bit; only mind, there is
to be no chasing the sheep or hens, or throwing stones at the ducks, or
it will be the last time you children get leave to come into my fields.'

'We won't do any mischief, sir,' said Peggy earnestly, as she tried to
make the bundle she carried sit upright, and look something like a baby,
instead of cuddling up like a shapeless lump on her shoulder.

'Very well, then, in you go.'

The farmer held the gate open till the five children and two babies had
filed sedately through; then he dropped the bar into the socket, and
tramped away down the dusty lane.

The sheep were away at the far side, and did not take the trouble to
glance up at the intruders.  The hens were clucking busily on a piece of
bare ground beyond the barn. Down in the lowest corner of the field was
a shallow pond, where a plump mother duck and half a dozen downy
ducklings were sailing placidly about.  They were new-comers
comparatively, and the children greeted them with shouts of approval.

'Why can't babies swim about and do things, instead of always crying and
going to sleep?' asked Tommy, eyeing his small twin brothers with great
dissatisfaction, as they sat in a row on a fallen tree-trunk.  'I'd
rather have young ducks any day; they've twice as much sense.'

'See that one eating up my bread and butter!' cried Jack; 'he's
something like a duck.  I wish Farmer Jones would give him to me.'

'I'm quite sure he wouldn't,' said Peggy sharply; 'ducks are dreadfully
dear things: mother's said so lots of times.'

Jack didn't answer; he was leaning over the tree trunk, throwing tiny
bits of crusts to the duckling, who was doing his best to choke himself
with them.  Soon after, the duckling came round in front of the trunk
where they were sitting; and it was the funniest little object, with its
stumpy wings, and a big yellow bill that opened and shut like a pair of
scissors.

[Illustration: 'IT WAS THE FUNNIEST LITTLE OBJECT.']

There were five more swimming about beside their mother; there might be
dozens more in the farmyard, while they had nothing of their own.  A
sharp little duck like that would be as good as a dog to play with.
Jack had watched it with longing eyes; he was certain the farmer would
never miss it, if he were to take it home for a little while--only a
little while; he could easily bring it back again, and it wouldn't be
one bit the worse.

The others played on with the daisies and the butterflies; the babies
sucked their thumbs and fell asleep in their small nurses' arms; the
little duck forgot his mother and his brothers and sisters, and strayed
farther and farther away after the crumbs, till presently two small
brown hands pounced down, and he found himself a prisoner.

'Quack! quack!' called the mother duck, missing the wanderer.

'Quack! quack!' cried the little duck.

Peggy and Bessy looked round.

'Why, what are you doing, Jack? Didn't Farmer Jones say you weren't to
tease the ducks?'

'Who is teasing the ducks?' demanded Jack, in a tone of injured
innocence.  'I'm going to take it home for a bit, and teach it a lot of
tricks.'

'You'd better leave it alone!' cried Peggy, in alarm; 'it would be
stealing.'

'It would be nothing of the kind.  I'm not going to keep the duck.
Girls haven't a bit of sense; they're just made to go telling tales.'

'I don't ever tell tales,' returned Peggy, with dignity.  'Did I ever
tell who it was left the gate open when the pigs got in that day?'

'Well, don't tell tales this time either,' was Jack's only
acknowledgment. 'We'd better be going now, before anybody comes.'

Jack was the biggest boy, and liked his own way.  Moreover, he generally
made the rest like it too. Peggy and Bessy uneasily got up from their
seat, and back the procession went across the green grass and daisies,
Jack carrying the duck inside his jacket, where it quacked loudly, and
made the company look round anxiously, for fear of stray listeners.

'What will mother say when she sees it?' suggested Tommy, as they slunk
along the lane.

'Mother is not going to see it,' returned Jack; 'it's going into the
wood-shed.  I'll make it a nice house there, all to itself--better than
it had at the farm by a long way.'

So instead of going straight into the house, the party repaired to the
wood-shed at the end of the garden, where the duck was carefully fenced
in behind some boards, and supplied with the remainder of the crusts for
supper.

'He'll go off to sleep in a bit,' said Jack, with a sigh of relief. 'Now
we'll go in; and mind, you're not to say anything about it.'

It was easy for Jack to say that, but it wasn't by any means so easy to
do it.  Every minute or two somebody would begin to say something
bearing upon the subject, and break off short in sudden alarm. Every
time there was a moment's silence, they would be listening for faint
quacks from the wood-shed, and somehow it befell that there came no
further opportunity of visiting the prisoner that evening; for it was
Saturday,--the great festival of the bath-tub,--and by the time the
whole seven had gone through the performance, it was too late for
anything but bed.

Never mind; to-morrow would be Sunday, and Jack promised himself a
lovely time with his dear cluck.  He would slip a piece of bread into
his pocket at breakfast; there was a noble ditch not very far off, where
nobody ever went, and he would take it there for a swim. Jack took a
last look through the curtainless window at the shed roof, and went to
bed brimful of plans for to-morrow and the duck.

Ah, if that duck had but known or understood the joys that lay before
him!  But he didn't; he was only a poor solitary baby duck, taken away
from his mother and his home, and left all alone in a cold, strange
place, and the night was very long and very bleak, and his little body
ached with cold and hunger, and he quacked and quacked till his throat
grew sore, and the quacks wouldn't come any longer, and at last, just as
it was beginning to grow grey morning, he feebly curled up his yellow
toes, and rolled over on his back--and died!

'Tommy, come down the garden, and mind nobody sees you,' whispered Jack,
after breakfast.  'We'll take that duck to the ditch, and have some fun.
Hurry up!'

The two raced down to the wood-shed; all was quiet enough inside.  Jack
looked round in some astonishment.  'He must be fast asleep yet; I
thought he'd have been quacking like anything for some food.'

Tommy was peering into the corner.  He got up suddenly with a startled
face.

'Jack,' he said solemnly, 'I do believe he's gone and died!  See how
he's lying.'

Jack had him up in his arms in an instant.  He did not know much about
dead ducks, but the first touch of the little body, that had been so
soft and warm the night before, sent a cold chill right through him.  He
looked down at it for a minute in speechless dismay, and then he burst
out into a perfect storm of sobs.

'Let's go and tell mother,' said Tommy, beginning to cry too; and off
they went.

But even mother could not bring the little duck back to life.  She
quietly put it into a basket, and told Jack to take it up to Farmer
Jones, and tell him all about his wrong-doing.

Tommy went with him for company, and the pair felt exactly as if they
were going to a funeral; and certainly no funeral they had ever seen
went half so slowly, and with so many halts and pauses.  Sooner or
later, however, they _had_ to get there, and Jack had to falter out his
confession as best he might.

'It was because it was such a dear little duck that Jack wanted it,'
explained Tommy valiantly, when Jack got to the end.  'We didn't mean to
hurt it.'

The farmer listened in grim silence.  'Perhaps not,' he said; 'but I
can't have you in my fields again: you'll have to be content with the
lane for the rest of the summer, so I'm thinking you'll find it's been a
dear duck for you more ways than one.'

'Mother was quite right,' said Jack, as they trudged back down that
dusty lane; 'ducks _are_ dreadfully dear things!'


[Illustration: tailpiece to That Dear Duck]




[Illustration: headpiece to Little Miss Muffle]




                         *Little Miss Muffle.*


Little Miss Muffle was sitting waiting.  She had on her new winter coat
and her new winter bonnet, and she sat as still as a mouse.

[Illustration: 'LITTLE MISS MUFFLE WAS SITTING WAITING.']

'Why is little Miss Muffle so gay,
In her winter coat and bonnet to-day?
Because she is going with mother away
For a drive in a carriage and pair,'

said Uncle George, coming into the room.  He always called his niece
Miss Muffle, though her real name was Annette.

'Yes,' said Miss Muffle, 'I am going with my mother, and I shall not be
a bit cold.  I am never cold in the winter; my mother keeps me so warm.'

'Yes,' said Uncle George; 'your father and mother are rich, and can give
their little girl all she wants. I wonder if Miss Muffle would like to
go and see some little girls who have no warm coats or shoes and
stockings?'

Miss Muffle looked up at Uncle George.

'I should like to see those little girls, Uncle George.  Will you take
me to see them?'

So Uncle George went in the carriage with Miss Muffle and her mother.
And as they were driving along he told the coachman to stop at some poor
cottages near the road.  He lifted Miss Muffle out of the carriage, and
told her mother they would not be long, if she would not mind waiting.
Uncle George knocked at the door of the first cottage.

Miss Muffle gave a little shiver, for there was no fire, and sitting
close together on the floor were three little children, trying to get
warm under an old shawl of their mother's.

'And how are the children getting on at school?' said Uncle George.

'Only Ben has gone,' said the mother, 'for the others have on shoes,
except a pair of slippers that they wear in turn on fine days, but such
weather as this they would be wet through at once.'

'Have they had their dinner?' asked Uncle George.

'They have each had a piece of dry bread; that is all I can give them,
for the father is out of work.'

The tears were in Miss Muffle's eyes.

Uncle George slipped out of the door, and presently came back with a
great basket, which he opened, and gave each of the children a large
sandwich, at sight of which their eyes gleamed with joy.  How hungry
they were!

'And you must get some coal at once, Mrs. Trotter,' said Uncle George,
putting some money on the table, and at the same time taking out of the
basket tea, sugar, bread, cheese, bacon, and all sorts of food.  'And
you must have a good meal for your husband and the children, and we will
see about shoes and stockings in a day or two.'

'Uncle George,' said Miss Muffle, when they returned to the carriage, 'I
will give them all the money I have, and father and mother will give
some, and we will buy clothes and shoes and stockings for the poor
little children.


[Illustration: tailpiece to Little Miss Muffle]




[Illustration: headpiece to A New Red Riding-hood]




                        *A New Red Riding-hood.*


'Now, Miss Sibyl, why did you go and tell that "Red Riding-hood" to
Baby?  You know it always makes him cry, the soft-hearted darling!'

'Well, he ought to learn not to be so silly.  I won't amuse the little
ones again, nurse, if you want me to spoil them!' said Sibyl, with
dignity.

'I do think you might make the story end nicely, any way,' grumbled
nurse, hushing Baby, who was crying lustily.

'I can't make it end well, nurse. It would not be true to say she was
saved, because she wasn't--she was _eaten_!'

This was Sibyl's parting shot as she ran out of the nursery.

'Never you mind what she says, my lambie; there are no wolves here at
all, and Red Riding-hood was not killed.  There, stop crying, my beauty,
and you shall come and help me sort the linen in the next room.  No, not
you, Miss Jean; one is enough to worrit; you just stay here till
tea-time, like a good girl.'

So nurse went away with Baby, leaving little seven-year-old Jean alone
in the great nursery.

The gas was not yet lit, and the familiar room looked strange and
mysterious in the dim, uncertain light of the fire.  The corners were
shrouded in gloom, and the dancing flames threw huge, flickering shadows
upon the walls.

Jean drew her stool nearer the fire and shivered, but not with cold. She
was a very nervous child, with a horror of the dark.  She could not
explain, even to herself, exactly what it was she feared; it was a kind
of nameless something, but the form it sometimes took was 'wolves.'  She
knew there were no wolves in this country, she knew there was nothing to
hurt her--yet she was afraid.  The child was often laughed at, and was
much ashamed of her fears, and no one knew what she suffered at times.

Oh, the fright that story of Red Riding-hood gave her!  In vain she
tried to think of something else; it came back again and again, and she
shivered with sympathetic terror as she pictured to herself Red
Riding-hood's walk through the wood, and the horror she must have felt
when her grandmother turned out to be a wolf!  Half of her knew that it
was only a fairy tale, and all nonsense, but the other half argued that
Sibyl said it was true, and Sibyl always spoke the truth. Nurse said it
was not true, but then she only said that to soothe Baby.

So poor little Jean sat quaking with fear, starting at every sound,
fancying that she saw things move, and feeling that she must look behind
her, and yet dared not.

But at last tea was brought in; nurse and Baby returned, the gas was
lit, and Jean forgot her fears, for a time, in bread and jam.

The next day was Christmas Eve, and there was a great deal of fun going
on at the Vicarage.  The Merivals were a large family, and every one had
secrets from every one else, and wonderful plans for the morrow.  Mr.
Merival always gave a packet of tea and sugar to some of the old women
in the village on Christmas Eve, and all of these had been to the
Vicarage that morning to fetch it, except one.  She was a poor old body,
who lived about a mile away, at the end of a wood, and was often too ill
with rheumatism to venture out of doors.

'Sibyl,' said Mr. Merival, meeting her in the hall as he went to put on
his greatcoat,--'Sibyl, I want you to take Grannie Dawson her tea this
afternoon.  Take it before dark.'

'All right, father; I'll do it when'--and Sibyl's voice was lost in the
distance as she bounded out of doors.

'Little giddy-pate!' ejaculated her father; then, turning to Jean, he
said,--

'See that some one takes that tea to poor old Grannie, little one. I
would not have her feel neglected for anything.'

So saying, he departed, leaving the little girl in the hall.

Jean waited long and patiently, but no one came.  Every one was either
busy or not to be found. Mother and the elder girls were decorating the
church, the maids were busy, and Sibyl and the three boys were off on
some important business of their own.

As time went on, Jean became more and more convinced that, as usual,
thoughtless Sibyl had forgotten everything but what she was doing at
that moment.  It was past three, it would soon be dark, and Grannie
Dawson's tea--what was to be done?  Father would be vexed with Sibyl if
she forgot to take it, and no one would like merry Sibyl to be in
disgrace on Christmas Eve.  Could she go herself?  Oh no; father never
meant _her_ to go. Besides, it was getting dark, and the way was through
a wood. Wolves!  Horrible thought!  And yet poor old Grannie Dawson was
so ill, so lonely.

'Sibyl!  Sibyl!'

No answer.

Little Jean sat some time longer struggling with herself.  Then she
started up, slipped on her little warm red cloak, and, taking the basket
with the tea and sugar, walked resolutely out of the house, down the
garden, and along the road.

The weather was cold--not real nice Christmas cold, but damp and raw,
and the roads were wet and sloppy with half-melted snow.

Jean's heart beat fast, and she drew her cloak tightly round her as she
neared the wood.  The sky was overcast, and the wind blew in fitful
gusts in her face, and sobbed and sighed in the pine trees on either
side.  It really was very dark in the wood.  The waving branches made
the shadows move in a weird manner, and there was no saying what evil
beast might not lurk behind those misty bushes, ready to pounce out on
the unwary passer-by.

[Illustration: 'SHE DREW HER CLOAK TIGHTLY ROUND HER.']

The child thought many times of turning back, but then she remembered
the poor old woman, and pressed on.  Her teeth chattered, and she
grasped her basket convulsively, glancing on either side with wide-open,
terrified eyes.  Oh, why had she come?  Surely that was a wolf's
howl--and behind her, so that she could not turn back!

Very quietly she crept along till she came in sight of the little
thatched cottage where Grannie lived.  Then she gathered herself
together, ready to set off running.

But what was that noise?--it was not fancy.  That huge form bounding
towards her--a wolf!

With a wild scream of terror, little Jean fled towards the cottage, the
wolf after her.  Nearer and nearer it came, but fear lent wings to the
child's feet, and she just reached the door in time to burst in and slam
it in the wolf's face.  Then she threw herself on the floor and burst
into a fit of frightened crying.

'Oh, the wolf! the wolf!' she sobbed, as old Grannie tried to soothe
her.  'Listen, it is at the door.'

And sure enough the old woman heard it whining and scratching outside,
and then came the sound of a man's voice.

Leaving Jean in the next room, Grannie Dawson opened the door, and in
walked--Farmer Martin and his big collie!  So big and shaggy was that
collie-dog, and yet so very quiet and gentle, that no child, even timid
little Jean, could be afraid of him.  The Merivals knew him well, and
used often to pet and tease him when they went to the farm to see Mrs.
Martin, and the farmer had now called at Grannie Dawson's cottage to ask
whose child it was who seemed so afraid of his dog.

So the wolf was only dear old Cheviot, who had recognised Jean, and
wanted to be patted.  Oh, how relieved she was, and how much ashamed of
herself!

When Jean had recovered herself a little, kind Farmer Martin carried her
home in his arms, Cheviot trotting on before, wagging his tail and
looking over his shoulder at her, as if to apologise for frightening her
so.

It was quite dark when they reached the Vicarage, and some of the family
had come home, and were wondering where Jean could be.  The farmer told
her story, and, to her surprise, she was petted and made much of by all.

But she had had a serious fright; her nerves were shaken, and she was
not at all well for some days. The Merival children began to see that
what they had laughed at as 'Jean's nonsense' was very real to her.
They left off teasing and laughing at her, and encouraged her instead,
for each of them wondered, in their heart of hearts, if they themselves
could have shown such true courage as little Jean showed when she did
what she was so much afraid of because she thought it right.

Jean was always nervous, but she left off being afraid of 'wolves,' for
each time she heard her new pet name of Red Riding-hood she remembered
what that terrible wolf had turned out to be.


[Illustration: tailpiece to A New Red Riding-hood]




[Illustration: headpiece to Lilla's Doll Show]




                          *Lilla's Doll Show.*


Lilla had more dolls than she knew what to do with.

Some were sitting in chairs, some lying in cradles, and one was seated
in a perambulator.

'I have more dolls than any other little girl has,' said she, as she
held three in her arms.  'I have been counting them, and I have fifteen
large dolls, and ten small ones, and twelve very small ones, and then
there are the little china dolls in the bath and in the china cradles.
To think of one little girl having so many dolls, mother!  Sometimes I
think I have too many.  And there is no one but myself to play with
them.  I wish I knew what to do with them all.'

[Illustration: 'SHE HELD THREE IN HER ARMS.']

Mrs. Lee stroked Lilla's curly hair.

'Well, said Mrs. Lee, 'there are some very good little girls at the
school in the village, and I am sure it would be a great treat to them
to see all your dolls.  And I want to give them a treat, so I will ask
them to come here, and you shall arrange all your dolls and playthings
in the nursery for them to look at.  Don't you think that will be a very
good plan?'

Lilla clapped her hands.

'Oh, how very nice that would be!'

And she and her mother dressed the dolls in their best clothes, and
placed them all round the nursery.

'How pretty they look!' said Lilla; 'I think the little girls will like
them.  And may I give them some dolls to take home?'

'You may do as you please,' said Mrs. Lee, 'for they are your own
dolls.'

So the little girls came--six of them; and they all said, 'Oh!'

'What a lot of dolls!' said one little girl; 'more dolls than there are
at the shop.'

After the show Mrs. Lee gave the children some tea and plumcake; and
then Lilla handed each of them a doll.

How pleased were the six little girls when they found they were each to
have a doll!  And all of them said that Miss Lilla's doll show was the
best treat they had ever had.


[Illustration: headpiece to Selina and her Doll.]




                         *Selina and her Doll.*


'I should like to have a large wax doll of my own,' said Selina; 'large
enough for me to make clothes for, with buttons and strings, to fasten
and unfasten: I should play with it all day, and undress it at night,
and put it in a cradle.  It should have eyes to open and shut, and I
should shut them at night, and then it would seem to be asleep.  How
nice it would be!'

Selina was sitting in the garden talking to herself, and did not think
that any one heard her; but her mother had come into the garden and
heard what her little girl was saying.

[Illustration: 'SELINA WAS SITTING IN THE GARDEN.']

'You have two or three dolls, Selina,' said she.

'Yes, mother, but they are small ones, and I want a very large one. And
my dolls have brown hair and black eyes, and I want a doll with blue
eyes and light hair, and one that can open and shut its eyes, like
Cousin Bella's.'

And Selina looked up at her mother.

'Mother, will you buy one for me?'

'I am afraid that I cannot buy one for you.  I have not so much money as
your Aunt Sarah has to spend upon dolls and playthings.'

Selina was silent for a moment, then she said,--

'Yes, I know that.  Mother, I do not care about the large doll. I will
make some new clothes for my small ones, and try to think that they are
large.'

'That is a good child,' said her mother; 'and perhaps some day I shall
be able to get a larger one for you.'

So Selina tried to think no more of her Cousin Bella's large doll, and
her mother gave her a piece of muslin to make a frock for one of her own
dolls, and some blue ribbon for a sash.

Selina sewed away merrily, and she and her mother talked over a letter
that had come from her father, who was in France, and who said he hoped
to be home again in a day or two.

'And tell Selina that I have got a box for her, with a present inside.'

'I wonder what it is?' said Selina.

She had not long to wait, for two days after they had had the letter,
her father came.  They were very glad to see him, and he was very glad
to see them. And for a little time Selina forgot all he had said about a
present. But her father said,---

'Well, Selina, you have not asked about your present.'

'Oh dear no!  I had quite forgotten,' said Selina.  'What is it?'

'That you must find out,' said her father.

So Selina had the box opened.

'Oh, mother, mother! look, look!  It is the most beautiful doll I have
ever seen--more beautiful than Cousin Bella's, and it has light hair and
blue eyes, and is as large as a baby.'

'I bought it in Paris,' said her father.  'They make very wonderful
dolls there--dolls that can speak; and this doll that I have bought for
my little Selina can say "Mamma" and "Papa."'

How pleased was Selina with her doll!  Her father showed her how to
press the doll to make it speak, and all Selina's little friends came to
see the wonderful French doll that could say 'Mamma' and 'Papa.'


[Illustration: tailpiece to Selina and her Doll]




           *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *




                         _A NEW BOOK FOR GIRLS_


                                *MOLLY*

                            *A. C. HERTFORD*

                           EDINBURGH & LONDON
                      OLIPHANT ANDERSON & FERRIER

[Illustration: Molly]




                    _A NEW BOOK FOR GIRLS AND BOYS_


                            *COMRADES TRUE*

                                  *By
                        ELLINOR DAVENPORT ADAMS*

                   *ILLUSTRATIONS BY EDITH SCANNELL*

                           EDINBURGH & LONDON
                      OLIPHANT ANDERSON & FERRIER

[Illustration: Comrades True]




                     *LIST OF BOOKS IN THIS SERIES*


Adventures of King Clo
A Princess in Disguise
A Stranger in the Tea
The King's Counsellor
Poor Cock Robin
Nellie at the Cave
The House that Jack Built
Fighting a Goose, and other Stories
Kitty's Picnic
Charley's Pussies
The Girl without Shoes
Aillie's Prayer
The Rescue
The Lieutenant's Daughters
The German Pastor
Dick Ennis
How to be Beautiful
Little Henry
The Little Woodman
Clive's Conquest
Daring Dot
Minnie Fenian's Wrong-doing
Fanny Garden
Henry and Eliza
Sing a Song of Sixpence
Mary, Mary, quite Contrary
Where the Sky Falls
The Highland Chairman
Little Patience
Mary Grant
Mary and Archie Graham
The Military Blacksmith
Fanny's Old Frock
The First Christmas Tree


                           EDINBURGH & LONDON
                      OLIPHANT ANDERSON & FERRIER
                         _And all Booksellers_


                 MORRISON AND GIBB, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH






*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KITTY'S PICNIC AND OTHER STORIES
***




A Word from Project Gutenberg


We will update this book if we find any errors.

This book can be found under: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/43999

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works to protect the
Project Gutenberg(tm) concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything
for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may
use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative
works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and
printed and given away - you may do practically _anything_ with public
domain eBooks.  Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.



The Full Project Gutenberg License


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg(tm) mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg(tm) License available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1. General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic works


*1.A.* By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works in your possession. If
you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

*1.B.* "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things
that you can do with most Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works even
without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph
1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic
works. See paragraph 1.E below.

*1.C.* The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of
Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works. Nearly all the individual works
in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you
from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg(tm) mission of promoting free access to electronic
works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg(tm) works in compliance with
the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg(tm) name
associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this
agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full
Project Gutenberg(tm) License when you share it without charge with
others.


*1.D.* The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg(tm) work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

*1.E.* Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

*1.E.1.* The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg(tm) License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg(tm) work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org

*1.E.2.* If an individual Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic work is
derived from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating
that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can
be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying
any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a
work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on
the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs
1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

*1.E.3.* If an individual Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic work is
posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and
distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and
any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg(tm) License for all works posted
with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of
this work.

*1.E.4.* Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project
Gutenberg(tm) License terms from this work, or any files containing a
part of this work or any other work associated with Project
Gutenberg(tm).

*1.E.5.* Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg(tm) License.

*1.E.6.* You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg(tm) work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg(tm) web site
(http://www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or
expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a
means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include
the full Project Gutenberg(tm) License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

*1.E.7.* Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg(tm) works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.8.* You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works
provided that

  - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
    the use of Project Gutenberg(tm) works calculated using the method
    you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
    to the owner of the Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark, but he has
    agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
    within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
    legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
    payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
    Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation."

  - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
    you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
    does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg(tm)
    License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
    copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
    all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg(tm)
    works.

  - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
    any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
    electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
    receipt of the work.

  - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
    distribution of Project Gutenberg(tm) works.


*1.E.9.* If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark. Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3. below.

*1.F.*

*1.F.1.* Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg(tm) collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works, and the
medium on which they may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but
not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription
errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a
defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

*1.F.2.* LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg(tm) trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees.
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY,
BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN
PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND
ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES
EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

*1.F.3.* LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

*1.F.4.* Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

*1.F.5.* Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

*1.F.6.* INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg(tm)
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg(tm) work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg(tm)


Project Gutenberg(tm) is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg(tm)'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg(tm) collection will remain
freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg(tm) and future generations. To
learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and
how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org .


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is
64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf . Contributions to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the
full extent permitted by U.S.  federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page
at http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation


Project Gutenberg(tm) depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where
we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways
including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,
please visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic
works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg(tm)
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg(tm) eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg(tm) eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless
a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks
in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

    http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg(tm),
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
