The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Boyhood of Jesus, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Boyhood of Jesus

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: December 28, 2013 [EBook #44531]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOYHOOD OF JESUS ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










    THE BOYHOOD OF
    JESUS

    [Illustration]

    PUBLISHED BY
    DAVID C. COOK PUBLISHING COMPANY

    Factory and Shipping Rooms, Elgin, Illinois




Try to be like Jesus.


    The Bible tells of Jesus,
        So gentle and so meek;
    I'll try to be like Jesus
        In ev'ry word I speak.

    For Jesus, too, was loving,
        His words were always kind;
    I'll try to be like Jesus
        In thought and word and mind.

    I long to be like Jesus,
        Who said "I am the Truth;"
    Then I will give my heart to him,
        Now, in my early youth.
                     --_Lillian Payson._

[Illustration: THE BABY JESUS.]




    COPYRIGHT, 1905,
    BY DAVID C. COOK PUBLISHING COMPANY.




The Little Lord Jesus.


    Away in a manger,
        No crib for a bed,
    The little Lord Jesus
        Laid down his sweet head.
    The stars in the sky
        Looked down where he lay--
    The little Lord Jesus
        Asleep on the hay.
    The cattle are lowing,
        The poor baby wakes,
    But little Lord Jesus
        No crying he makes.
    I love thee, Lord Jesus;
        Look down from the sky,
    And stay by my cradle
        To watch Lullaby.
                --_Luther's Cradle Hymn_




The Child Promised.


[Illustration]

THERE was once a time when there was no Christmas at all. There were
no beautiful Christmas trees and happy songs and stockings filled with
presents. No one shouted "Merry Christmas!" or "Christmas Gift!" No
one told the sweet story of Jesus, because Jesus had not come into
the world and so there was no Christmas. You see Christmas is Jesus'
birthday, and before he came, of course people could not keep his
birthday. You have heard of how wicked and unhappy the people were long
ago. Although God loved them and tried to make them do right, they
forgot about him and did so many naughty, disobedient things that they
were very miserable. Then God sent a wonderful message to them. He told
them that some day he would send them his own Son, who should be their
King and teach them how to do right. He said that his Son would come as
a little child to grow up among them to love and help them. God even
told them what they should call this baby who was to be their King. God
said that Christ would be like a beautiful light showing them where to
go. It would be as though some people stumbling sorrowfully along a
dark street should suddenly see a bright light shining ahead of them,
making everything cheerful and pleasant. They would be joyful like
people who gather in the harvest. Jesus makes his children happy, and
he wants them to shine out and make others happy. These people who were
so unhappy before Jesus came, were very glad to know that some day he
would come. They talked about him and waited a long, long time before
he came and brought Christmas light into the world.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE BABE IN BETHLEHEM.]




The Coming of Jesus.


LONG ago there lived a good man named Joseph, a carpenter of Nazareth,
who built houses and made many useful things for people. He also loved
to read God's Gift Book, and tried to obey its rules. One day the king
of the land where Joseph lived ordered everyone to write his name in a
book, and pay a tax, in his own city. So Joseph and Mary his wife got
ready to take a long journey to their old home, Bethlehem. There were
no cars for them to ride in, so they must either walk or ride a donkey.
As the fashion was there, Mary wore a long, white veil which covered
her beautiful face.

The streets were full of people, walking, or traveling on mules,
donkeys, or camels--all going to be taxed. It was winter, but in a
warm country, and they went through valleys of figs, olives, dates,
oranges and other good things.

[Illustration]

They must have been very tired when they reached Bethlehem's gates,
for they had come a long distance, and the dust of the road, the
bustle of traveling, and the strangeness of it all, seemed to add
to their trials. The people of Bethlehem had opened their homes and
welcomed the strangers, until every house was full, and still the
people kept coming. They could scarcely go up the steep hill, they were
so weary, and Joseph tried to get a place to rest, but there was no
kind invitation, no welcome in any house for them, and the inns were
crowded. The inns were not like our hotels for travelers; they were
flat-roofed stone buildings, without windows. There were no warm rooms
with carpets, and soft beds for tired travelers to lie on. There were
only bare floors, and everyone had to bring his own bed and food. The
courtyard was full of animals--donkeys, mules, camels, sheep and cows.

After Joseph had tried and failed to get a resting place, as there
was no room anywhere, some kind friend told him of a cave on the
hillside which was used as a stable, and to this they gladly went.
Sweet-smelling hay was all around, and the floor was covered with
straw; possibly mild-eyed cows and gentle sheep were sleeping in their
stalls. Along the walls were mangers, or boxes to hold the grain and
hay when the animals were fed. Here Mary and Joseph found a shelter
and a sleeping place; indeed, they were thankful to be led there to
rest upon the hay. In the night a wonderful thing took place: God sent
the baby Gift Child into the world. This gift had been promised long
before to Adam and Eve, and now it had come--the most beautiful and
dearest Baby ever held in a mother's arms. The night grew dark, the
house-lights went out one by one, and the people in Bethlehem slept.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE ANGELS' SONG.]




The Angels' Joy.


THE happiest song that was ever sung was sung on the first and best
Christmas of all. There was a time when there was no Christmas. Can you
think how glad you would be if you had no Christmas, and then one day
all at once you had the first and best one of all?

This song was sung and the first Christmas came one night long years
ago, far over the sea, near a little town called Bethlehem. It did not
come first to kings and great people, but to some shepherds who were
sitting up all night watching their sheep.

Outside of the city were beautiful sloping green fields where the
shepherds let their sheep run about and eat the grass. The weather
there is very pleasant at Christmas time; not at all like our weather.
The shepherds can sit out on the grass all night, watching their sheep.

Did you ever see a sheep or a lamb? Do you know that your mittens and
jackets and nice warm dresses are made of the wool which the sheep have
to spare for us? The shepherds have to stay out with the sheep all
night because they are very gentle and timid animals. They cannot fight
for themselves, and if they were left alone the wolves would catch them.

[Illustration]

One night about 1900 years ago some shepherds were watching their sheep
in those fields. Very likely the shepherds were some of the people who
were hoping that Jesus would soon come; perhaps they were talking about
him, and wondering how they would know if he did come.

All at once a bright light shone about them, and they saw an angel and
heard him speak to them. Very kind and beautiful the angel looked, but
the shepherds were frightened.

The angel said to them, "Fear not; for behold, I bring you good tidings
of great joy, which shall be to all people; for unto you is born this
day in the city of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. And this
shall be a sign unto you; Ye shall find the babe, wrapped in swaddling
clothes, lying in a manger."

[Illustration]

As the angel was speaking, the shepherds saw with him a great number of
beautiful, shining angels. Then was sung for the first time this grand
song, for Christmas had come. I do not know the tune, but the very
words are in the Bible: "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth
peace, good-will toward men." Glory to God, for the greatest gift that
ever came; peace on earth, for all who love this Savior.

As soon as the angels finished the song they went back to heaven, and
left the shepherds alone.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE SHEPHERDS VISIT JESUS.]




The Shepherds Visit Jesus.


WHAT would you do if you had been one of those shepherds to whom the
angels brought the good news of Jesus' birth? I will tell you what they
did. They left their sheep to take care of themselves, and hurried off
to Bethlehem, for that was the city the angels meant.

[Illustration]

They went in the gate and at last found the right place. It was called
a stable.

They soon found the dear little baby Jesus, just as the angels had
said, lying in a manger, and Mary his mother and Joseph taking care of
him.

The little manger was in the stable, and there the shepherds stood
beside it and looked into the face of the babe.

Do you think the dear little baby had a nice bed to lie in? It looked
like a block hollowed out. It was the box out of which the cows ate.

It was warm and soft, because his mother had put nice soft hay in it,
and wrapped him all up with a long strip of cloth. They were in a
stable because so many people were in the city that there was not a bit
of room left. I think it must have been a clean place, with lots of
nice, sweet new hay.

When the shepherds saw the baby they knew that he was really Jesus
their Savior. They knelt at his feet and worshiped him. They were so
happy that they could hardly say what they felt. They soon went away
and told the good news to every one they met. They were very glad
because Jesus had come. He came as a little baby so he would know
how to love and help all other babies and little children, and be an
example for them to follow as they grew older.

We are glad Jesus came, and we love to keep his birthday, because he
gives us joy and peace, fills our hearts with love, and helps us to be
good and happy here and to get ready to be happy in heaven.

God, our Father in heaven, sent to us this wonderful Christmas Gift.
Think of the great love he must have for us, to give us his Son. Think
of the great love Jesus had for us, that he could leave his beautiful
home in heaven to come and help us and show us how to live. Let us
thank him every day for his great love. "For God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son" to be our Savior.

[Illustration: THE BABY JESUS IN THE TEMPLE.]




The Child in the Temple.


JOSEPH, and Mary the mother of Jesus, stayed in Bethlehem for a while.
When Jesus was only eight days old he received his name; he was called
"Jesus," as the angel had told Mary. It was the custom of the Jews to
take their first son to the temple and present him to God, so Joseph
and Mary went to Jerusalem to present Jesus to God in the temple.

[Illustration]

At the time when Jesus was born, there was an old man, named Simeon,
living in Jerusalem. He was a good man and was looking and wishing for
Jesus, the promised Messiah, to come. God's Holy Spirit had told him
that he should not die until he had seen Jesus. Simeon went up to the
temple to worship God every day. One day while he was in the temple
Mary and Joseph brought the child to present him to God. When Simeon
saw them he knew that the infant in Mary's arms was his Savior. He at
once took Jesus in his arms, and with a heart full of joy he blessed
God and said, "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace." He
had seen the Savior for whom he looked, and had nothing more to wish;
he was perfectly satisfied to die, now that he had seen Jesus, the
Savior of the world. When Jesus comes into our hearts we are satisfied,
and not only ready to die, but we are ready to live and do with glad
hearts all that God wishes us to do. The best way to praise God for
his wonderful gift is to _live for him_ and lead others to praise him.

[Illustration]

God's Spirit was upon Simeon, and he rejoiced to see Jesus his Savior,
whom God had sent to his people. Do you wonder that Simeon's heart was
full of joy at seeing God's greatest gift to man? Should not we praise
him for it?

At the time of Jesus' birth, the world was very dark and sinful. People
did not know much about God or what he wanted them to do. In Jesus,
Simeon saw a great Light which would lighten the world.

Did you ever try to walk in a dark night where there were no lights to
shine on the pathway? If so, you were sure to go the wrong road, or to
stumble and fall. While you were walking in the darkness, did a great
electric light suddenly shine out, making all light about you? So into
the dark lives of the people Jesus came to be a Light. We are sure that
Jesus is a Light to us and to all the world. He lived a holy life, so
he made a right path for us to follow. He showed us how to live and how
to die, so that we may live forever in heaven. If we take his love into
our hearts and do as he tells us, we shall walk in the light. Just as a
railway locomotive runs in the great light from the lamp that sends its
bright rays along the track, so Jesus dwelling in our hearts shines his
light just where we are to travel--that is, he tells us by his Spirit
and by his Word how we are to act and what we are to do.

[Illustration]

While Mary and Joseph and Jesus were yet in the temple, Anna, a
prophetess, came in and saw Jesus. Then she, too, praised the Lord
because Jesus had come to be a Light to the world. She told the people
that Jesus was the Son of God who had come into this world to live in
our hearts and be our Light. Jesus in our hearts is like a torchlight
which we carry with us always, and which never goes out, but gives us
light wherever we go. We follow this light when we do the things that
Jesus taught us to do, and when we follow the example that he left us.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE WISE MEN VISIT JESUS.]




The Journey of the Wise Men.


THERE were some very rich, wise men living away off in another country.
God wanted them to know about his Son. He did not send angels to tell
them; he took another way. He put a strange new star in the sky. These
wise men spent a great deal of time studying about stars, so when they
saw this they were very much interested in it. When they saw strange
stars they thought strange things would happen. They had heard that the
Jews were looking for Jesus to come and be their king, so they thought
this star must mean that he had come. They thought very likely that he
had come to Jerusalem, for that was the great city of the Jews. So
they started on their long journey.

[Illustration]

They traveled on until they reached Jerusalem. Then they went at once
to Herod the king and asked him where Jesus was who was born King of
the Jews. Herod had not heard that Jesus was born, and when he heard
this question he was troubled, for he was not born king--he had been
made king. So he was very much afraid that Jesus, who was born King,
would take his place.

He called in the Jews, who he thought ought to know, and asked them to
find out where Jesus was to be born. They looked in the Bible and found
that he was to be born in Bethlehem.

When Herod heard this he told the wise men to go to Bethlehem and look
for Jesus, and when they found him to bring him word so that he might
go and worship him. He wanted to kill Jesus, but he did not tell the
wise men so. They again started out, and they were very much pleased to
see the same star still shining in the sky.

[Illustration]

This star went before them to guide them to Bethlehem. They believed
the star would guide them right, so they followed it until it stood
over a house in the city.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE WISE MEN'S GIFTS.]




The Wise Men's Gifts to Jesus.


WHEN the wise men went into the house they found Jesus there with Mary,
his mother, and Joseph, her husband.

[Illustration]

As soon as they saw him they knew it was Jesus, whom they had come so
far to see. They fell down before him and worshiped him. They brought
him rich gifts of gold, frankincense and myrrh. These gifts of gold,
frankincense and myrrh were costly and useful; they must have been of
great help to Mary and Joseph, who were very poor. These gifts from
the wise men to Jesus showed their love for him. Those who truly love
Jesus now will be glad to give of their money to help the poor and
needy, and to teach those who do not know about him; and what we do for
his sake he counts as done for him. But the greatest gift that we can
give Jesus is the gift of our hearts.

While they were there worshiping Jesus, God was looking into the heart
of Herod, reading his wicked thoughts. He knew that if the wise men
went back and told Herod where Jesus was, he would come and kill him.
So when the wise men were ready to go away, God warned them in a dream
to go back another way and not to go near Jerusalem, where they would
meet Herod. They believed God in this too, and did as he told them to.

[Illustration: ON THE WAY TO EGYPT.]




The Flight into Egypt.


[Illustration]

WHEN the wise men were gone, God sent an angel to warn Joseph to take
Jesus and Mary, his mother, and leave Bethlehem. He told him to take
them to Egypt and stay there until he told them they might return. Why
do you suppose God told Joseph to leave their home? He knew that Herod
wanted to kill Jesus, and that it would be dangerous to stay there.
If they went to Egypt they would be safe, for Herod had no power over
Egypt. They would find friends there too, for a great many Jews were
living in Egypt then.

Joseph loved God and believed him, so he proved that he loved and
believed him by obeying at once. He did not wait until morning, but at
once arose, got ready, and took Mary and Jesus and they started in the
night for Egypt. They did not go to some other place instead. They went
just when God told them to go, and went just where he told them to; and
they were safe while they followed God's directions.

Jesus was soon safe in Egypt. Herod did not know this, and was still
making his plans to kill him. He was a very wicked, cruel man. He was
wicked enough to kill two of his own sons, so you see he did not care
much about killing a baby.

He did not know just how old Jesus was, but thought he could not be
over two years old. He did not know where he lived, for the wise men
did not go back to tell him. But he was bound to kill Jesus, so he
told his cruel soldiers to go into every house in Bethlehem, even into
the houses near Bethlehem, and kill every boy baby they could find two
years old or less.

[Illustration]

So they went around killing all the baby boys. They would go into a
house, snatch the baby out of its crib, or out of its mother's arms,
and kill it right before her eyes. That was a sad time in Bethlehem;
for many poor mothers were weeping for their children. It was very sad
for the mothers, but the little boys were safe in heaven with God.

God was still watching over and taking care of his Son; so when at last
Herod was dead, God again sent an angel to Joseph, telling him to take
Jesus and Mary and go back to the land of Israel, or the land of the
Jews. So Joseph again set out on a journey. But he heard that Herod's
son was king, and he was afraid to go back to Bethlehem, so he went to
Nazareth.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE BOY JESUS IN THE TEMPLE.]




Jesus in the Temple.


WHEN Jesus was a very little baby, his mother took him to the temple,
their church, and gave him to the Lord. I suppose they wrote down his
name, as we do our Cradle Roll babies. If they did, I think we may call
Jesus a Cradle Roll baby. I am sure that Mary and Joseph did all they
could to help the baby to grow up a good, wise, loving boy. The dear
little babies do not stay babies long; then their toys go and they want
books, for they must learn a great deal before they are grown-up men
and women. So Jesus' toys were soon put away, and he began to study
just as you do. He grew bigger and stronger every day. At last he was
as big as you; then bigger, until he was as big as your brother or
sister.

[Illustration]

Do you know someone who is twelve years old? At last Jesus got to be
so old. At that age a boy was no longer a Cradle Roll baby, nor even
a child. Jesus' mother said that now he could go with her and Joseph
and their friends when they went up to Jerusalem to church. Did you
ever go on a journey? How did you go? On the cars. Were you glad to
go? You got tired, I know. A picture of Joseph and Mary and Jesus on
their way to Jerusalem would show you that they all walked. It was a
long, hard journey, for they not only had to walk all the way, but
they had to carry all their bundles. They went in a company, so they
had a nice time talking with their friends as they walked. Then when
tired or hungry, they would stop by the way in the shade of some great
rocks--for in that land rocks are found oftener than shade trees.

You can make a picture of this journey in your mind. Think of the wall
of the city of Jerusalem and the open gate; inside the wall is the
church, or temple; there is a road of sand, and on both sides of the
road are a few trees and a good many rocks.

At last they all reached the city, and slept and rested and ate their
food, then bathed and dressed in their best clothes, and went to the
temple to worship God and hear about his law out of the Bible.

All this was very wonderful and beautiful to Jesus. He began to
understand that God was his Father, and that he had some very great
work to do in the world. He was so interested that when it was time to
start for home he stayed after all the rest left, and went back to the
temple. Perhaps he had been allowed to go by himself and did not know
they had started home.

Mary did not miss Jesus for some time. She thought he was with his
young friends having a good time. At last she became frightened, for
she found that he was not with any of these friends. Oh, how frightened
she was! Her beautiful boy that she loved more than her own life, was
lost! I once knew of a very lovely boy who was lost all night. How his
mother cried, and how we looked for him all night! In the morning his
mother was the one to find him, then her sorrow was changed to joy.

[Illustration]

Mary and Joseph left their friends and went back to the city. In her
heart Jesus' mother knew where to look for him. Can you think where he
was? They found him in the temple talking with the teachers. They were
talking about God's law. They had their books, reading and studying
together. These books were made of strips of parchment or paper
fastened at both ends to round sticks and rolled up.

[Illustration]

When Jesus saw his mother and knew how she had grieved about him, he
left the teachers at once and went back home with her and Joseph. He
told them that he knew God was his Father, and that he must be about
his work. But quickly and lovingly he obeyed his mother and went with
her, even though he longed to stay.

Do you think Jesus was about his heavenly Father's business when he
obeyed Mary and Joseph and went home so lovingly with them? He surely
was, for some of his work that he came to earth to do was to show
children how to treat their parents. One of the great laws of God is,
"Children, obey your parents."

Jesus loved to be in the temple, but he quickly and cheerfully went
home with his mother and Joseph. I think that as he and his parents
were with many of their dear friends, he was allowed to go around among
them and with them when they went to the temple, so when his parents
left he perhaps did not really know when his mother started. Do you
think she was careless to go off and leave him? No, I am sure she was
not; she no doubt thought he was coming along with his aunts or cousins
or his little friends in the company.

[Illustration: THE BOY JESUS IN HIS HOME.]




Jesus in His Home.


DO you like cold, dark, stormy days? How do you feel when you get
up and find the sun shining in your window? You cannot help feeling
good--some of it gets into your heart and makes you feel happy. You
make us think of sunny days. Sometimes children are cross, and they
make us think of stormy days. The gloomy, naughty, selfish child makes
everything in the house seem sad. But how about the bright, happy,
laughing, helpful child? When he comes into the room, it seems as if he
brought some sunshine in. He is a sunshiny boy.

Do you know I am thinking of a boy who I believe was the sunshiniest
one among all the sunshiny children in the world. Who was he? He was
Jesus, the dear boy who was so ready to obey his parents. He started
home with Mary and Joseph, perhaps telling Joseph all about how it
happened that he was left behind them.

[Illustration]

After their long, hard journey, how glad they were to get home! I am
sure Jesus did all he could to get everything ready. First he helped
Joseph bring in all the things they had with them, and Mary stood, at
the door of the little house, looking at the boy she loved so much, and
feeling so glad and thankful that he had not really been lost.

[Illustration]

Then when they were all settled and rested and Joseph had to go to his
carpenter work, Jesus would do such little things as he could to help
him, while Mary was doing her work. Joseph was a carpenter. What do
you think he made? What tools did he use? Then I think Jesus must have
learned to use them, too. Perhaps sometimes Mary was sick, and then I
am sure he did all he could to help and comfort her and make her forget
her pain. He would bring the jar of fresh water, bathe her head and
give her a cool drink. If your mamma was sick, what could you do to be
a blessing to her? I knew a little boy who was a real sunshine boy.
When mamma was sick he would set the table for papa, and hand mamma a
cup of tea, and give her a smile and a loving kiss. We can all do so
much, and many other things. Think of some of them. You can pick up
your toys and books and keep them tidy, without waiting for mamma to
talk about it; you can always run to her with a loving kiss when you
wake up and when you go to bed; you can be very gentle and kind to your
little brothers and sisters; you can try every day in every way to
make sunshine in your home--to make your home the most beautiful place
in the world. Boys and girls who do that can make their homes next to
heaven.

[Illustration]

Jesus did that even when he was very small. As he grew older he grew
wiser and better. He helped Joseph more and more in his shop, and what
he did not know, Joseph taught him.

He did not spend all his time in the shop, He perhaps went to school,
for he loved to study. I think Mary loved to teach a boy who was so
ready to learn. He would stand beside her while she read to him.

[Illustration]

He liked to play like other boys, but he always did the things that
other children should do, so they would know just what was right. That
is why I tell you so much about him. Perhaps children would not know
just the right way, if Jesus had not been a boy and lived with his
mother and loved and obeyed and helped her.




Around the Throne.


    Around the throne of God in heaven,
        Thousands of children stand,
    Children whose sins are all forgiven,
        A holy, happy band.

    What brought them to that world above,
        That heaven so bright and fair,
    Where all is peace and joy and love?
        How came those children there?

    On earth they sought the Savior's grace,
        On earth they loved his name;
    So now they see his blessed face,
        And stand before the Lamb.
                     --_Annie H. Shepherd._

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Page 27, repeated word "him" removed from text. Original read: (praise
him him for it)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Boyhood of Jesus, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOYHOOD OF JESUS ***

***** This file should be named 44531.txt or 44531.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/4/5/3/44531/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
