The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Northfield Tragedy, or the Robber's
Raid by J. H. Hanson



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: The Northfield Tragedy, or the Robber's Raid

Author: J. H. Hanson

Release Date: January 6, 2014 [Ebook #44609]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NORTHFIELD TRAGEDY, OR THE ROBBER'S RAID***





                         THE NORTHFIELD TRAGEDY
                          OR THE ROBBER'S RAID

                         A THRILLING NARRATIVE.

    A HISTORY OF THE REMARKABLE ATTEMPT TO ROB THE BANK AT NORTHFIELD,
                               MINNESOTA.
THE COLD-BLOODED MURDER OF THE BRAVE CASHIER AND AN INOFFENSIVE CITIZEN.
                   THE SLAYING OF TWO OF THE BRIGANDS.
      THE WONDERFUL ROBBER HUNT AND CAPTURE GRAPHICALLY DESCRIBED.
         BIOGRAPHIES OF THE VICTIMS, THE CAPTORS & THE NOTORIOUS
                 YOUNGER AND JAMES GANG OF DESPERADOES.




                             By J. H. Hanson




John Jay Lemon
26 Minnesota Street
St. Paul, Minnesota
1876






THE NORTHFIELD TRAGEDY.





LAYING OUT THE WORK.


Between the 23rd of August and the 5th of September a company of strangers
made their appearance at different localities in the State of Minnesota
attracting attention by their peculiar bearing, remarkable physique, and
decidedly southern phraseology. They would appear sometimes in pairs, and
at other times there would be as many as four or five in company. At one
time they would be cattle dealers from Texas, and again they were
gentlemen in search of unimproved lands for speculative purposes, and then
again they were a party of engineers and surveyors prospecting for a new
railroad when they would make enquires about roads, swamps, lakes and
timber lands, carefully consulting maps they had with them (published at
66 Lake Street, Chicago, 1876), and when opportunity offered Andreas'
State Atlas of Minnesota. These men visited St. Paul, Minneapolis, St.
Peter, Red Wing, St. James, Madelia, Garden City, Lake Crystal, Mankato,
Janesville, Cordova, Millersburg, Waterville, and Northfield, putting up
at the best hotels, spending their money freely, and creating a general
impression of free handed liberality. But there was a certain air of
audacity blended with their _sangfroid_ and easy manners which led men to
think they were no ordinary persons and aroused speculations as to their
true character and vocation. The registers of the hotels honored by these
guests bear the names of King, Ward, Huddleston, &c., generally written in
one line, but subsequent developments prove these to be merely _nommes de
guerre._

On Saturday, Sept. 3rd and Sunday five of these strangers were in Mankato,
and attracted universal attention by their peculiar carriage, suave
manners, and fine, almost _distingue_ appearance. They were well dressed
and rode good horses, and sat their horses like men who were bred to the
saddle. They made several purchases in the town, and one of them visited
the City Bank and obtained change for a fifty dollar bill. When riding
through the streets they showed their excellent horsemanship with a great
amount of display and swagger entering into conversation with several
citizens upon the merits of the animals they rode. They did not all stay
at the same hotel, two of them registering at the well known and justly
celebrated Clifton House while two others stopped at the Gates House, but
it is not known where the fifth man put up. Two of the men, however, spent
most of the night on the Sunday at a low brothel kept by the notorious
character Jack O'Niel. This foul den of infamy is just outside the city
limits on the opposite bank of the Minnesota river, and is surrounded by
heavy timber. A more fitting place for a thieves' rendezvous, and for
hatching plots or dark deeds, could hardly be imagined. It should be
stated here, that after the visit of the two strangers, Jack O'Neil went
to the Sheriff of Mankato and informed him that three young men--living in
Mankato were plotting at his house to rob and probably murder an old man
supposed to be possessed of considerable wealth, and residing at Vernon,
some eighteen miles from Mankato. He made arrangements for the sheriff to
overhear their conversation which resulted in the arrest of three young
rowdies, Mark Ingals, George Peabody and James Quane, who were frequenters
of O'Neil's infamous den.





                            A MURDER PLANNED.


It appears that an old man named Gallager, living in a log cabin on the
skirts of the woods surrounding Vernon, was supposed to have in his
possession a considerable sum of money. The old gentleman lived alone, was
known for his parsimony, and thought to be "a penurious niggard of his
wealth." The plan of these young villians was to go to the house of the
supposed miser, disguised, pretend to be "lost chicken hunters in the
woods," and induce the old man to come out and show the way. Getting him
into the woods they were to extort from him by threats the whereabouts of
his supposed hidden treasure, if threats failed, they were to have
recourse to torture, and that failing to murder!

O'Neil accompanied these scoundrels reaching the house of Gallagher about
2 o'clock. They enticed the old man out _a la programme,_ one placing
himself on each side of him the two others bringing up the rear. After
getting some little distance from the house, and as they were passing a
shed the one walking behind with O'Neil raised his fist armed with brass
"knuckle dusters," and was about to deal the old man a stunning blow on
the head, when he was seized by the Sheriff, who was lying in ambush
within the shed. The three were conveyed to Mankato jail and locked up,
and subsequently committed for trial upon the evidence of Jack O'Neil and
the Sheriff. There are those who think the whale affair was a "put up job"
by the notorious Jack to get rid of the three men who were in his way,
_and this occurred an the morning of Tuesday, the 7th of September._





                         JESSE JAMES RECOGNIZED.


Returning to the five strange men in Mankato, they are next seen on the
streets on Monday morning when a young man, Chas. Robinson who was
acquainted with the notorious Jesse James, went up to one of them and
remarked, "How do you do, Jesse, what brings you up this way." When the
man addressed eyeing the speaker keenly from head to foot, replied, "I
guess you have mistaken your man" and vaulting into the saddle, galloped
away. With this incident, the five men who had attracted so much notice,
excited so much admiration, and aroused many vague suspicions, disappeared
from Mankato. The same day five similarly dressed, similarly mounted, and
similarly appearing, strangers, arrived in Janesville, a village, on the
Winona & St. Peter railroad, in Waseca county, about 18 miles from
Mankato. As at Mankato they stopped at different hotels, two slaying at
the Johnson house, and two at the Farmers' Home. No one know where the
fifth slept, but on leaving the village on the Tuesday morning they halted
some little distance out, and one, taking off his duster, rode back toward
the village waving it over his head; he was followed in the maneuver by
another when all four rode away. It is thought this was a signal for the
fifth man, who, it is supposed, stopped at some house in the neighborhood.

Those, who stopped at the Johnson house, never made their appearance at
the public table until all of the rest of the boarders had finished their
meals, and during their stay in the town declined to admit a chambermaid
to their room to arrange it. After their departure several packs of
playing cards were found in their room torn up and thrown on the floor,
and several handful of buttons of various sizes were scattered about,
showing that the inmates had been indulging in a protracted game of
"poker." The girls who waited on them at table, say they were quiet and
polite, and never made any trouble.

Cordova is the next place these "gay cavaliers" turn up, all five of them
staying at the same hotel, three occupying one room, and two another with
a commercial traveler, W. W. Barlow, of Delavan, Wis., who describes them
as polite, jocose fellows. They talked considerably of cattle, and from
their language and peculiar dialect, Mr. Barlow thought them to be cattle
dealers from the south. They left the hotel at 7 o'clock in the morning,
politely raising their hats as they rode off. Cordova is about eighteen
miles, almost directly north from Janesville.

The next night, Wednesday, saw these five men housed at Millersburg, about
twenty-four miles west and north of Cordova, in Rice county. They left
here at an early hour on Tuesday morning, and at about 10 o'clock appeared
in the streets of Northfield, which lies about eleven miles north-west of
the latter village.

On the same Wednesday evening, four men who answered the description of
some of the bandits stopped at a hotel in Cannon City. The landlord thinks
they were Bob Younger, Bill Chadwell, and the two men who finally escaped.
He says that the next morning, the 7th, while three of the men were at
breakfast, one retired to his room and remained a long time with the door
locked. After all had departed, the chambermaid discovered a bloody shirt
and a portion of a pair of drawers, one leg of the latter being torn off
and carried away. The drawers were soiled with blood and matter, such as
would come from an old inflamed gun wound, and it was evident that the
wearer had such a wound on one of his legs. This is considered evidence
that the man arrested in Missouri, in October, and supposed to have been
one of the James brothers, was really him, but the alibi proved by that
party appears to be sufficient to prove that it was not.

It will be seen by the foregoing that there were originally nine men
engaged in the plot, which gives plausibility to the opinion held by many
that the terrible tragedy which followed was the result of a plan
conceived by some Minnesota desperadoes, who engaged these desperate
southern cut-throats to assist in it.





                                NORTHFIELD


is a thriving, pretty, little village, situated pleasantly upon both banks
of the Cannon river just thirty-nine miles from St. Paul, in Rice county,
on the St. Paul and Milwaukee railroad. A neat iron bridge unites the
northwest and the southeast sides of the town, and just above the bridge
is one of the finest mill races in the State, the water in its incessant
flow roaring like the ocean and appearing like a minature Niagara. There
is a large flouring mill on either side of the river belonging to Messrs.
Ames & Co. The public buildings are not surpassed in the State for their
beauty of design and adaptability of construction, and the Carlton college
is another institution of which the town may well be proud. Placed as it
is in the center of a rich farming district, the citizens are considered
well-to-do, and the bank transacts a large business.

The five strangers appeared on the streets at an early hour of the morning
of September 7th, and attracted a great deal of notice from the citizens,
some of them recognizing two of the men as a party who visited the village
about a week before, stopping at the Dampier House.

At about 11 o'clock two of these horsemen drew up at Jeft's restaurant on
the northeast side of the river and asked for dinner. Jeft told them he
had nothing ready, but could cook them some eggs and ham. The men told him
to do so, ordering four eggs each. Their horses were left standing untied
at the back of the premises. After ordering their dinner the two men went
out into the street and after some time returned, when they were joined by
three others and all sat down to their meal. They entered into familiar
discourse with the proprietor of the house, and asked him what was the
prospect of the forthcoming Presidential election. Jeft's reply was that
he took no interest in politics, when one of the men offered to bet him
$1,000 that the State would go Democratic. They still chatted on and
seemed to be waiting for some one. At length they left and mounted their
horses which were a sorrel, a cream color with silver tail and mane, a
black, a bay, and a brown, all fine animals, sleek and clean limbed, and
showing indications of blood. After leaving the restaurant, the five
horsemen crossed over the bridge, two remaining in bridge square and the
other three, riding up to Division street dismounted, and tied their
horses to the posts at the side of the Scriver block. They then sauntered
up toward bridge square, and after talking for some few moments leaning
against a dry goods box in front of Lee & Hitchcock's store (Scriver
block,) they walked back toward the bank which they entered. Three other
horsemen then came upon the scene and commenced at once to ride up and
down the street in dashing style, and calling upon the citizens who from
their doors were watching the eccentric proceeding, to get back into their
houses, commenced firing pistols in the air with immense rapidity.

Greater confusion could not be imagined than now ensued. Wherever persons
were seen upon the street, a horseman would dash up to them in full speed,
and pointing a long barrelled glittering pistol at their heads order them
to "get in you G--d--s--of a b." The streets were cleared in a few moments
and stores were closed in quicker time than it takes to tell it.

But though taken at a disadvantage, when many of the men were out at work
or away chicken hunting, the scare of the Northfield boys was but
momentary. Collecting their perturbed thoughts men rushed about in search
of fire arms, but this most necessary desideratum for a successful
encounter with a body of desperadoes or madmen, armed to the teeth, was
found to be very scarce on





                            THIS EVENTFUL DAY.


Mr. J. B. Hide, however, succeeded in getting a shot gun with which he
blazed away at the marauding scoundrels, or escaped lunatics, for it was
not at first exactly understood what the fellows were. Mr. Manning, armed
with a breech loading rifle, came coolly upon the field of action, backed
by Mr. L. Stacey and Mr. Phillips, while Dr. Wheeler armed himself with an
old breech loading carbine and placing himself in a room (No. 8) in the
third story of the Dampier House, delivered two very effective shots.





                                THE BATTLE


was now at its height, and firing was raging in downright earnest.

Manning, from the front of the Scriver block, Bates from the clothing
store of Mr. Hanauer, and Wheeler from the window directly over the
clothing store, and unobserved by the daring scoundrels, made it lively
for the desperate gang, and kept them from passing into Mill Square.

One of the gang was about mounting his horse and while stooping over the
pommel of his saddle with his back toward Wheeler, that gentleman took
deliberate aim and fired.

The fellow pitched right over his horse falling on his head to the earth
where he lay gasping for a few moments and soon was everlastingly still.

Manning in the meantime was not idle, and while Wheeler was searching for
another cartridge, he advanced from his retreat and seeing a horseman
riding towards him up Division street, he took a steady deliberate aim and
fired. The man immediately turned his horse and started off a few paces
rapidly, but the horse steadied his pace, the man rocked to and fro, and
suddenly the horse stopped and the man fell over to the ground, when
another horseman galloped up, sprang from his horse, turned the fallen man
over and took from him his pistols and belt, then springing again to his
saddle, he rode up the street.

Another scoundrel alighted from his horse and getting behind it commenced
a rapid fire down the street, seeing which the intrepid and cool Manning,
with all the _nonchalance_ in the world, raised his unerring rifle and
stretched the living barricade lifeless at the bandit's feet. The enraged
brigand then ran towards Manning, fearless of the formidable weapon of
Bates, and sheltering himself behind some packing cases under the open
stairway of Scriver block, he commenced a rapid fusilade, evidently with
the intention of keeping Manning from firing up the street at others of
the gang.

But Wheeler had succeeded in finding another cartridge and returning to
the room from which he delivered his first shot, a young lady, who had
remained at the window coolly watching the fight throughout, pointed out
to Wheeler the man who was keeping Manning from effectual work.

"Only aim as true as you did before" said





                              THE BRAVE GIRL


"and there will be one the less to fight" and Wheeler fired.

Instantly the villain dropped his hand upon his thigh, and the girl cried
out, "Oh, you aimed too low," thinking the shot had taken effect in the
middle third of the right thigh.

Wheeler at once left the room in search of another cartridge which
unluckily he was unable to find. The wounded man who had changed his
pistol to the left hand and discharged several shots at Manning, now
turned about, and seeing Bates inside his store with a pistol in his hand
and thinking it was from this source he had received his wound, as quick
as a lightning flash sent a deadly missive at the unsuspecting Bates.

The ball crashed through the intervening glass of the store front, and
burnt a scorching track across the victims face from ear to nose.

But during this time a bloody and terrible tragedy was being enacted in
the bank.

A scene exhibiting a greater amount of reckless daring, and brutal
ferocity; of intrepid courage, and heroic fortitude; ending in a most
dastardly, and





                      APPALLING, SICKENING, TRAGEDY


could not be imagined than the one which was in progress in the bank while
the street fight already described was going on.

Just a few moments before the raiders commenced their wild career on the
streets, three men rushed into the bank, holding in their hands large
pistols, the glittering barrels of which they directed toward the three
gentlemen, Messrs. Heywood, Bunker and Wilcox, who occupied the desks
behind the counter. Springing over the counter these desperadoes shouted
out





                          "THROW UP YOUR HANDS,"


"we intend to rob the bank."

"Which is the Cashier?" one demanded, and instantly approaching Heywood,
commanded him to open the safe. "I am not the cashier," was the reply.

The man then turned to Bunker, and made the same demand, but he also
denied that he held that important post. The fellow next addressed the
bewildered and fear-stricken Wilcox, whose terror prevented him from
answering.

The baffled man again turned to Heywood, and with oaths and threats
endeavored to make him open the safe.

Heywood replied that he could not, when the scoundrel fired a pistol close
to his ear, and said "if he did not at once open the safe he would scatter
his brains."

The brave Heywood still insisted upon his inability to comply.

The ruffian then seized him by the collar and dragging him toward the safe
drew out a long, keen edged knife, and posing it over Heywood's throat,
threatened to cut it from ear to ear if he did not at once open the safe.

But the brave man, faithful to his trust, stolidly refused, when the
robber released his hold of his collar and went into the safe vault.

Now was the opportunity for the faithful Heywood.

"If I can but get that ponderous door closed," thought he, "and spring the
bolts upon the scoundrel, the"





                        VILLIANS WILL BE BAFFLED,


"and my integrity saved from suspicion."

It was a supreme moment of dreadful anxiety to him, and such the intense
excitement of his feelings, that when he rushed upon the door to close it,
his strength was unequal to the task, and before he could recover himself
to renew the effort, a powerful hand seized him by the throat, and threw
him back from the vault, at the same time a ruthless arm struck him to the
ground with the butt end of a pistol.

Taking advantage of this struggle between Heywood and the robbers, Bunker
sprang to his feet and bounded toward the back entrance of the premises.

But before he reached the door a sharp report and the crashing of a ball
showed him that he had only miraculously escaped from having his brains
scattered by one of the bandits. Bounding out of the bank he ran madly
down Water street, not however till another shot from the murderous
revolver cranched through his shoulder.

At this point another of the band of ruffians hastily entered the bank and
exclaimed:

"Clear boys, the game is up."

The three men instantly jumped upon the counter and made tracks for the
door.

But one man paused in his headlong retreat, and seeing Heywood reaching
for his desk, turned round and leveling his revolver at the devoted head
of the faithful teller, fired, and without a groan, the brave man fell to
the floor,





                     HIS LIFE BLOOD STAINING THE DESK


and seat with its crimson stream.

In the street the baffled and retreating murderers sought their horses and
vaulting into their saddles they were soon rushing with frantic haste out
of town westward.

It was some few moments before the citizens could sufficiently recover
themselves to take in thoroughly the entire situation.

There lay in the open street a few paces from the bank entrance a bandit
in all the hideous ghastliness of a bloody death. A few feet from him was
stretched the lifeless body of a noble horse, while further down the
street on the opposite side another grim corpse lay in a pool of seething
gore.

Windows in all directions were shattered, and door posts showed scars of
imbedded bullets.

Reluctantly the assembled citizens approached the bank, and the sight
which there met their horror stricken gaze caused a thrill of indignation
to seize upon every nerve; and strong men turned pale as they clinched
their fists and set their teeth, registering an inward oath to wreak
vengeance upon the miscreant perpetrators of the dastardly outrage.

There lay poor Heywood! the man who dared death and defied three of the
most notorious scoundrels who ever "cracked a crib" or broke a scull, who
resisted torture, and finally gave his life blood in defense of his trust.

Who was the man to carry the appalling news to the young wife and tell her
that he, upon whom hung her very life, had left her for all time--that he
had been torn from her and hurled into dread eternity by the ruthless hand
of the bloody assassin!

Who was stout enough to bear the gore covered mangled corpse to the new
desolate and grief stricken home!

But there were those who were willing to pursue the





                          RED HANDED MURDERERS.


Some overcome with indignation, impetuously prepared for the chase, but
others, perhaps more determined men, who were willing to follow on to the
very death, were not so hasty in their departure, but as time proved were
prepared to pertinaciously follow up the trial with the tenacity of the
bloodhound.

Two of the former, Davis and Hayes, immediately sought for horses and none
being so ready as those of the two dead robbers, seized them, sprang into
the saddles, and were soon in hot pursuit.

Both men were well armed with rifles--one an eighteen shot Winchester with
globe sight. At every point they heard of the retreating villians upon
whom they were gaining rapidly. Dashing through Dundas, Hayes and Davis
kept up the pursuit till at last they saw a group of horsemen surrounding
a wagon from which they were apparently taking the horses. As the pursuers
advanced one of the horsemen turned from the wagon, and advancing a few
steps up the road ordered the pursuing men to halt.

Davis and Hayes instinctively obeyed, and strange to relate, these two men
who had been so impatient to commence the pursuit, now that they were
confronted by the audacious scoundrels found their courage waning, and
they halted.

Nor did they again find their courage return, but they sat there and saw
the marauders after securing one of the farmer's horses again boldly dash
away.

After the robbers had gone, Davis and Hayes leisurely wended their way to
Millersburg where they awaited the coming of the other pursuers, two men
standing but little chance against six such desperadoes.

It is true that Davis and Hayes had the advantage of the bandits in arms,
but it is doubtful after all, if there are many men to be found who would
have done differently, confronted as they were by six stalwart fierce
knights of the road well armed and unscrupulous in shedding human blood,
as they had shown at Northfield.

After the departure of Davis and Hayes, about thirty citizens organized
into a pursuing party, some mounted on horses, others were carried in
wagons and buggies, and all set out in full speed along the road the
robbers had taken.

Meantime the





                        TELEGRAPH WAS SET AT WORK,


and messages were sent to all points. Unfortunately the operator at Dundas
was not in his office, and although the call was repeated for an hour no
response was made. Had this gentleman been at his post, the people of
Dundas would have been prepared to receive the bandits on their arrival.

It has been expressed as a wonder by many that the gang, before making the
raid, did not cut the telegraph wires, but it appears from the confession
of one of them, that their plan was a much better one. They intended to
have destroyed the telegraph instruments before leaving, only the
unexpectedly hot attack which was made upon them by the plucky boys of
Northfield, completely demoralized them.

The first indication received at St. Paul of the daring raid, was from the
following telegram to Mayor Maxfield:




"Eight armed men attacked the bank at two o'clock. Fight on street between
robbers and citizens. Cashier killed and teller wounded. Send us arms and
men to chase robbers."

                                                             JOHN T. AMES.




This telegram reached St. Paul at about 3 p. m. The first train leaving
the city for the scene of hostilities at 4 p. m., was the Owatonna
Accommodation, on the Milwaukee & St. Paul road. From St. Paul were
dispatched, Chief of Police King, detective Brissette, officers Brosseau
and Clark, and Deputy Sheriff Harrison. At Mendota Junction, the party was
joined by Mr. Brackett and posse of police, consisting of Capt. Hoy, A. S.
Munger, F. C. Shepherd, J. W. Hankinson and J. West, of Minneapolis, all
well armed with seven shooters and rifles. At Rosemount, Farmington and
Castle Rock, the excitement was immense, many persons at these points
getting on the cars and proceeding to Northfield.

The train arrived at the scene of the most daring crime ever perpetrated
in the State at 6:20, the whole platform being crowded with an excited
populace.




                            THE DEAD BANDITS.


The police were at once led by the sheriff to an empty store where were
lying the inanimate and ghastly forms of the two bandits who had been shot
down by the intrepid Northfield citizens. One was found to be six feet
four and a half inches in height; his body exhibited a splendid physical
development, with arms and limbs of thewy muscles and skin as fair and
soft as a lady's; his face was of rather an elongated oval with sharply
cut features; high cheek bones, well arched brow and deep-set blue eyes.
His hair was a very dark, reddish auburn, inclined to curl. He wore no
hair on his face, but was closely shaved, and did not appear to be more
than 23 or 25 years of age. He was clothed in a new suit of black clothes,
worth about $25 or $30, a new colored shirt and good boots. The ball which
brought him down entered about three inches, in a line with the left
nipple and toward the center of the chest and completely riddling the man,
passed out on the same side beneath the shoulder blade. On his person was
found the card of the Nicollet House livery stable, St. Peter, on which is
printed the distances of the principal cities in this part of the State.
He had also on him an advertisement of Hall's safes cut from a local
paper. His pockets were well filled with cartridges, and he had round his
waist, beneath his coat, a cartridge belt. There has been some dispute as
to the identity of the man, but it is now pretty well settled that he is
Bill Chadwell _alias_ Bill Styles.




                             IDENTIFICATION.


There were two men from Cannon Falls, who came to view the bodies before
the interment, with the expectation of identifying one of the latter as a
brother-in-law of one of the two. He said if it was his relative, a bullet
scar would be found under the left arm. The scar was there, but the man
would not say whether the fellow was his relation or not. The man whom the
big fellow was thought to be, is




                              [BILL STYLES.]

                               BILL STYLES.


                               BILL STYLES,


a former resident of Minneapolis, who has a brother-in-law still living
there. This Styles left for Texas some time ago. It is said he was a
desperately bad man. It is told that his sister received a letter from him
a short time before, saying that now he had lucrative employment, and if
she wanted money he would send her some. He also wrote in his letter that
he would shortly be up this way, and would call on her. This sister was
adopted by a minister residing at Cannon Falls. A letter recently received
from the father of Styles proves beyond doubt the identity of the man.
Styles' father now lives at Grand Forks, D. T., and says that his son has
for some time lived in Texas. The father expresses no surprise at the
untimely end of his son, and says he was always a wild wayward boy with
whom he could do nothing.




                              CLELL MILLER.


                             [CLELL MILLER.]

                              CLELL MILLER.


The other man was five feet eight inches in height, but much stouter built
than the taller, with hair of the exact color, and like his inclined to
curl. His face was rounder and covered with about two weeks growth of
beard; the eyes, like the other's were blue.

The clothing was quite new, even to the shirt, which appeared to have been
put on that day. He also wore a white linen collar (new) and a white linen
handkerchief round his neck. On his feet were striped half hose and good
boots, but of different make, one boot being finer and lighter than the
other.

Gold sleeve buttons, gold pin and gold or filled case watch and chain,
with linen ulster duster and new felt hat of fine quality, "John Hancock"
make, completed his costume.

Beneath his clothing he wore a money belt of leather, but it was empty.
About a dollar and fifty cents had been taken from the two men, but Chief
King, in researching this fellow, found four dollars more. The wound was
an ugly, jagged bullet hole, very large, and with the edges much torn,
toward the center of the chest and about four inches below the heart.
There were also several small shot wounds on the body of this one and
three on the forehead; his hat was also riddled with shot, and it was
evident that he had been hit twice from a shot gun, for several of the
shot wounds were in the back. From photographs sent to the St. Louis
police, the man was at once recognized as Clell Miller.




                      SCENE OF THE BLOODY ENCOUNTER


The empty store in which the two corpses lay, is on Mill Square, which is
immediately over on the south side of the handsome iron bridge which spans
the Cannon river just below the mill race. On the north side of the square
is the flouring mill of Ames & Co. On the west is Scriver's block and two
or three small stores, among them that in which the bodies lay. On the
east side is the office of the Rice County _Journal_ and a wagon shop, and
on the south is the Dampier House, under which are three stores, the last
eastward and just opposite the corner of the Scriver block, is the
clothing store of Mr. Hanauer. The Scriver block has also a frontage of 80
feet on Division street, 22 feet of which is occupied by the First
National Bank of Northfield, in which one of the saddest and most daring
tragedies was perpetrated--the heartless and deliberate murder of a
faithful and brave man in the defense of the valuable property under his
charge.

There are some four or five wooden buildings below the bank on Fourth
street, and it was in this narrow space, from Mill Square to Fourth
street, that the great fight which startled the whole country took place.
Many indications of the fearful contest in bullet holes were found in
every direction.  Windows were pierced and shattered and balls must have
been thrown around for a time as thick as hail, for the whole encounter
took place within the short space of fifteen minutes. The conflict was a
sharp and bloody one, and speaks volumes for the coolness and intrepidity
of the citizens of the little provincial town.

From Mr. Bates, who took a prominent part in the encounter, the following
was learned:

He said at about 11 o'clock his attention was called to four men who came
from over the river. They came over the bridge and were mounted on four
splendid horses. The men were well dressed, and Mr. Bates says, four
nobler looking fellows he never saw; but there was a _reckless, bold
swagger_ about them that seemed to indicate that they would be rough and
dangerous fellows to handle. Altogether he did not like the looks of them.

Again, at about 2 o'clock in the afternoon, as he was standing at the
entrance of the store, talking to Mr. C. C. Waldo, commercial traveler
from Council Bluffs, he saw the same men ride past--three came up the
street from mill square and one down, street meeting within thirty feet of
the bank. They dismounted and tied their horses to the hitching posts and
two, he thought, went into the bank and two came down to the staircase
leading up into the upper stories of Lee & Hitchcock's buildings, and here
they stood leaning against the banisters talking. Commenting upon their
fine physique, and upon their unusually good mounts, Mr. Bates and Mr.
Waldo withdrew to the far end of the store to look over some sample
trusses.

They had not long been so occupied when they heard several shots fired in
rapid succession, and the thought flashed upon the mind of Bates at once,
that the bank was in danger--Mr. Waldo stating that he cried out:

"Those men are going for the town, they mean to rob the bank." Mr. Bates,
however, does not recollect saying anything, he became so excited. He
remembers, though, rushing to the door, and seeing some men riding up from
the bank--they came riding towards him with long pistols in their hands and
called out, "Get in there you son of a b----."

Mr. Bates at once seized a shotgun and ran back to the door, but the gun
would not go off. He then put down the gun and seized a fine seven shooter
which was _not_ loaded, and as the men came down again, (they were riding
to and fro, evidently intent upon keeping people from going towards the
bank), he standing behind the door jambs, called out.

"Now, I've got you." And pointed the empty pistol as if drawing a bead on
them.

They turned their horses suddenly and fired at Mr. Bates, the ball
crashing through the plate glass. There were other men at the bank firing
down the street. The next he saw was Mr. J. S. Allen running down the
street from the bank, and two shots were fired at him.

Mr. Manning, of Mill Square, whose store is adjoining the block in which
the bank is, next came upon the scene. He ran out of his store with a
breech loading repeating rifle, and took a deliberate aim and fired from
the corner, Mr. Bates calling out:

"Jump back now, or they'll get you."

Next Mr. J. B. Hide came up with a double-barrelled shot gun and
discharged the two barrels, and retired to re-load. Mr. Phillips also took
a turn at the scoundrels, and L. Stacy delivered a cool, deliberate aim.
Mr. Bates next heard a report over his head and saw one of the desperadoes
fall from his horse. The horse made a faltering plunge forward and then
suddenly stopped and the man pitched over with his face to the ground and
in a few moments was dead. This shot was fired by Henry Wheeler from an
old carbine from out one of the windows of the Dampier House.

Mr. Manning was still firing, and as he crept to the corner Mr. Waldo
called out:

"Take good aim before you fire." Immediately after this shot one of the
horses started up the street and the rider began to reel and swing to and
fro and suddenly fell to the ground just opposite Eldridge's store.
Another horseman immediately rode up, dismounted, and spoke to the
prostrate man, who was stretched out at full length, supporting himself on
his outstretched arms, when he rolled over on his back. Then the other man
took from him his cartridge belt and two pistols, and, remounting his
horse, rode off.

Another horseman, finding Mr. Manning's fire too hot, dismounted from his
horse and got on the opposite side of it for protection, when an unerring
ball from the breech loader brought the horse down, the man running behind
some boxes which were piled beneath the stair-case before mentioned, and
now ensued a




                             LIVELY FUSILADE


between this fellow and Manning, the scoundrel keeping himself well under
cover, but a ball from Wheeler's musket struck the fellow in the leg, half
way above the knee.

He at once changed his pistol to the left hand and grasped the wounded
limb with the right, still trying to get at Manning. Finding himself
getting weak, he turned and limped off up the street, but, seeing Bates
with a pistol in his hand, he sent a ball whizzing toward that gentleman,
grazing the side of his cheek and the bridge of his nose, and burying
itself in a collar-box in the store.

Mr. Bates says he feels the ring of that ball in his ear still, and the
ball, he says, he will ever keep as a souvenir of the hottest day
Northfield ever saw.

The man limped away, and when he got opposite to Mr. Morris' store, he
cried out to his retreating companions, "My God, boys, you are not going
to leave--I am shot!"

One of the party, riding a sorrel horse with a light tail and mane, turned
and took the wounded man up behind him.




                        MR. F. WILCOX'S STATEMENT.


Mr. Wilcox, the teller of the bank, stated that he, in company with Mr.
Heywood and A. E. Bunker, were in the bank at about 2 o'clock, when three
well dressed, powerful looking men entered by the door, which was open.
They held large revolvers in their hands, and one of them cried out:
"Throw up your hands, for we intend to rob the bank, and if you halloo, we
will"




                          BLOW YOUR BRAINS OUT.


They then asked which was the cashier, to which Mr. Heywood replied, "He
is not in." They then sprang over the counter and demanded the safe to be
opened. Addressing each in turn they said: "You are the cashier," which
each denied.

Seeing Heywood seated at the cashier's desk, one of the ruffians went up
to him with his long, narrow-barrelled pistol and said:

"You are the cashier; now open the safe, you ---- ---- son of a ----."  Mr.
Heywood said:

"It is a time-lock and cannot be opened now." One of the men then went
into the vault, the door being open. Heywood at once sprang forward and
closed the door of the vault, shutting the robber in, when another of the
men seized Heywood by the collar and dragged him away from the door and
released the incarcerated robber.

The man who came out of the vault--a slim, dark complexioned man, with a
black moustache, then called to the others to seize the silver which was
lying loose (about $15) and put it in the sack. They did not do this, but
seized about twelve dollars in scrip and put it into a two bushel flour
sack which they had with them. The dark complexioned man, who appeared to
be the leader, then again attacked Heywood, insisting upon his opening the
safe, threatening to cut his throat, if he did not, and actually drawing a
big knife across his throat.

The heroic and faithful teller, however, was not to be deterred from his
duty, and would rather




                            SACRIFICE HIS LIFE


than betray his trust. Some few moments--it seemed ages to the bewildered
and terror-stricken lookers-on--were spent in Heywood's struggling to break
from the murderous villain and gain his liberty.

At length he broke away, and regaining his feet, ran toward the door
crying




                                "MURDER!"


The man at once struck him with a pistol and knocked him down, and,
dragging him to the safe door, commanded him to open it. But the intrepid
clerk stolidly refused, when the villain shot at him, but did not hit him.

Evidently the shot was intended rather to intimidate him than injure, but
the scoundrel had reckoned without his host, for the effect was lost upon
Heywood.

But upon the discharge of the pistol Bunker made a start for the back door
and ran for dear life, one of the robbers pursuing and firing, the shot
taking effect in the shoulder. Bunker, however, reached the street (Water
street) and ran to Dr. Coombs' office.

During the whole of this time four or five men were riding up and down the
street, shooting in every direction, and keeping up an incessant fusilade.

One of the men outside came riding up furiously and called for the men to
leave the bank.




                             "THE GAME'S UP."


he said, "and we are beaten."

The three men in the bank then sprang over the counter and rushed to the
door, and Heywood staggered to the chair, but, as the last one was getting
over the counter, with one hand on the cashier's desk, he turned round and
deliberately fired. Heywood fell senseless to the floor! The man then
sprang on the rail and out at the front door, and he (Wilcox) cleared out
of the back door into Manning's hardware store.

Wilcox was not sure whether the ruffian struck Heywood when the latter
staggered to the cashier's chair, and he did not stop to see if he was
dead when he fell. He said the reason he did not try to get out or help
Heywood was that one of the men stood over him with a pistol in his hand.

Mr. Allen said he saw three men cross the bridge and go toward the bank.
They were all big, powerful men, well dressed. One had sandy
side-whiskers, shaved chin and blue eyes. Another, wore a black mustache,
and was a slight but tall man, and better dressed than the others. The
third man was heavy set, with curly brown hair, and beard of about one
week's growth. They had tied their horses and talked a while, when another
came up, and he went into the bank. Mr. Allen then waited half a minute,
and then walked up to the bank to see what was up.

"As I got to the back door," he says, "one man came out and grabbed me by
the collar, and said 'you son of a----, don't holler,' drawing a revolver. I
got out and made tracks as fast as I could, two shots feeing fired after
me."

Mr. Ben Henry says that he was first attracted to the strangers by seeing
the horses tied, and he went up to one and was examining the saddle, when
one of the men came up and said,

"What are you doing here?"

"Looking at this saddle," was the reply "I want an article like that, and
thought perhaps I could strike a bargain with the owner."

Drawing a pistol, the fellow cried out:

"Now you git'" And he _did_ "git," but as he walked away a bullet came
hissing by his head and struck a wall close by. Henry deliberately picked
up the ball and put it in his pocket, but made long strides for home.

It appeared that the object of the men on the street was at first only to
keep people back from the bank, and not a desire to murder
indiscriminately, but when they found that the Northfield people would not
scare worth a cent, and that real work was before them, they showed all
the




                      SAVAGE BLOODTHIRSTY PROPENSITY


of their nature, and wherever a face showed itself, whether it was man,
woman or child, the robbers fired murderously at it, crashing in windows
in a lively style.

Early Friday morning it was reported in Northfield that Brissette and Hoy
had joined their forces at Morristown and had a hot encounter with the
gang, which had been reinforced by three others. The police succeeded in
killing one man and capturing the wounded man carried from Northfield. The
robbers then took to the woods and the police held them there. This report
was proved at a later date to be a complete fabrication, but so excited
were the people that every rumor received credence and grew in dimensions
as it was handed round by the busy throng of news seekers.




                                THE BANK,


It is in a small apartment, about 20 by 50 feet, situate in the Scriver
block, folding doors in the center of the front opening into Division
street. It has a counter three feet high, running across to within three
feet of the west wall, and going back the whole length of the building.
This counter is mounted by a thirty inch glazed rail, leaving a space of
two feet in front, where the men jumped over, scratching the counter with
their boots. Inside of the center is the safe vault fitted with the
Detroit Safe Company's doors, and to the left is the cashier's chair where
poor Heywood fell a victim to the assassin's hand. A blotting pad lay upon
the desk stained with the life-blood of the murdered man.




                          HEYWOOD'S DEATH WOUND.


Poor Heywood was shot through the head, the ball entering at the right
temple and passing downward and inward, scattering his brains all about,
and doubtless depriving him instantaneously of consciousness, and putting
him completely beyond all suffering, although he breathed for about twenty
minutes, but did not speak. In addition to the bullet wound, there was a
slight scratch in the right side of the neck as from a knife.

                   [BREAKING THE NEWS TO MRS. HEYWOOD.]

                    BREAKING THE NEWS TO MRS. HEYWOOD.


Mr. E. E. Bunker was not considered dangerously wounded, the ball passing
in at the back of the right shoulder, below the point of the shoulder,
passing downward and forward and upward, coming out just above the
clavicle, making only a severe flesh wound. This wound, however, was very
nearly being a fatal one, as the ball passed close to a principal artery,
which no doubt, had it been severed by the deadly missive, would have
produced death by hemorrhage.

Since the capture at Madelia of the Younger boys, Mr. Bunker has given his
recollections of the bank raid, and as it differs in several points from
others already given, we embody it in this narrative. It will be seen that
the narrative recognizes two of the men who entered the bank as Charley
Pitts and Bob Younger.




                        MR. E. E. BUNKER'S STORY.


Mr. Bunker said that himself, Mr. Heywood and Mr. Wilcox were sitting at
their respective desks, when they heard a heavy rush from the bank door to
the counter. They turned round and saw three men climbing over the counter
and with their knees on it and revolvers pointed directly at the three
bank officers. A man presumed to be Jesse James, and who acted as leader,
called out, "Throw up your hands, we are going to rob the bank." James
then ran across the room and passed Heywood into the vault, which was
open, but seeing the safe door closed, turned back from the entrance and
seizing Heywood by the collar who, from being older than the others and
from the position of his desk, was naturally supposed to be the cashier,
ordered him to open the safe, Mr. Heywood said it was a time lock, and it
could not be opened. The other said that was a d--d lie.

Charley Pitts then came up on the other side of Heywood and threatened to
kill him if he did not immediately open the safe. One of the others called
out, "Let's cut his throat and be done with it." Heywood commenced
shouting murder and repeated the cry three or four times. They then
hustled him about, and James struck him on the head with the butt end of
his pistol, knocking him down. He was then dragged towards the vault,
where he lay with his head partially in the vault. James then drew the
knife across Heywood's neck, who did not say anything, appearing to be
partially insensible, when another of them stooped down and fired close to
the prostrate man's head, the ball penetrating a tin box containing papers
in the vault.

All this time I was on my knees on the floor, with Bob Younger standing
guard over me. I had a revolver under the counter, where I stand, and
which was in full view, and I endeavored gradually to edge over and obtain
possession of it, but Bob saw the attempt, and seeing the weapon, put it
into his pocket, saying, at the same time, that I could do nothing with
this, and it was of no use. He then placed it in his pocket and commenced
searching me, but did not take anything from me. The pistol was a Smith &
Wesson, and we always regarded it as an excellent weapon. Bob having
turned his head partially around to see what was going on in the other
part of the room, I raised my head with the view of giving the alarm to
any one I saw in the street, but my movements were quickly observed by Bob
who pulled me down, saying at the same time, that I had better keep quiet
for, if I attempted to rise again he would kill me. He then inquired where
was the cashier's till, and I pointed to a box containing some nickels and
scrip, the former done up in cartridges. He seemed to know very well there
was more loose money than that, and he told me he would kill me if I did
not show him the till. I did not answer him, and he pulled out a drawer
containing stationery, but the drawer having some $2,000 he did not open,
supposing, probably, that in its contents were the same.

Meantime, while the two men were engaged with Heywood, James told Bob
Younger to bring out the sack. Bob took out a green bag and thrust a
handful of scrip into it, but did not take any of the nickels.

The distance from where I was to the rear of the bank, is about 25 feet,
and the rear door of the two hardware stores adjoin the rear door of the
bank. I thought if I could make my way out in this direction, I would have
a chance of giving the alarm, so that the citizens would come to the
rescue. In making this movement, I should have to pass where Mr. Wilcox
was sitting, and I made a slight motion for him to move so that I could
get past. He saw my motion and shifted his position. The man who stood
over me having his attention directed to the proceedings of the others, I
started, but was immediately followed by Charley Pitts, who fired at me,
the ball going through the blinds of the door and lodging in a brick
chimney, but not striking me. There was a stairway leading down, and Pitts
standing on top of that, fired down on me, I having reached the bottom at
the time, fired again, the ball just striking me below the scapula,
passing through the thin portion of it, and down, passing out about half
an inch below the collar bone, the course traversed being about seven
inches, and narrowly missing the sub-claviel artery, where the wound would
have been fatal.

I think it was James that said, while keeping us down, "don't one of you
move; we have fifty men on the street, and you will be killed if you
move." The safe was not locked at all, but there was only about $15,000 in
it, which they might easily have secured.

Mr. Bunker said he recognized the body killed at Madelia, as that of
Charley Pitts, and also identified Bob Younger, by the likeness published
herein.




                           NICHOLAS GUSTAVSON.


Several citizens of Northfield narrowly escaped with their lives during
the encounter. A Norwegian, Nicholas Gustavson by name, was struck with a
bullet at the right side of the head, just at the ear, the ball running
under the scalp and out at the top of his head. He says when he was
struck, and for several minutes after, his whole left side was paralyzed.
But after a few minutes of unconsciousness, he was able to reach his
boarding house, but the next day he was unable to rise from his bed. It
was evident that the skull was fractured, and depressing upon the right
lobe of the brain, and if the patient was not opportunely relieved by
trepanning the skull, the man must succumb. Subsequent events proved the
correctness of this view, for the operation was not performed, and the
poor fellow expired on the eleventh--four days after the dreadful tragedy,
thus adding another victim to rekindle the fire of indignation in men's
minds.

Illustrative of the dangerous nature of the weapons of the lawless
ruffians carried, it should have been stated that balls fired from one
side of Mill Square struck and completely riddled buildings on the other
side of the square, a distance of one hundred and fifty yards.




                               THE INQUEST.


Friday afternoon the coroner, Dr. Waugh, from Faribault, held an inquest
upon the bodies of the two scoundrels who met with such a richly deserved
end, and the following gentlemen were sworn as a jury: A. H. Rawson, S. L.
Bushnell, R. Silk, J. L. McFee, R. Plummer and C. W. Gross. The jury were
not long in arriving at the following verdict: "That the two unknown men
came to their deaths by the discharge of firearms in the hands of our
citizens in self-defense and in protecting the property of the First
National Bank of Northfield."

The same jury, with the coroner, held an inquest over the remains of the
lamented victim of the raid. The witnesses who gave evidence were E.
Hobbs, ex policeman J. S. Allen, F. Wilcox and E. L. Fuller, whose
statements were similar to those the same gentlemen made to the writer,
and recorded elsewhere in these pages. The verdict found was: "That J. H.
Heywood came to his death by a pistol shot fired by an unknown man
attempting to rob the First National Bank of Northfield."




THE ROBBER HUNT.



                               ON THE ROAD.


The desperate freebooters had dashed from Northfield with but five horses,
one, the brown mare carrying double. They rushed ruthlessly on, taking the
entire road, and demanding that those they met should "take to the ditch."
A short distance out of the city an old German farmer with his heavy team
loaded with "garden truck," met them on a narrow road on each side of
which were deep gullies. Drawing his pistol the leader exclaimed with an
oath, "take the ditch G----d d----n you." Over the old fellow went scattering
his vegetables, breaking his wagon and harness, and sprawling himself in a
sea of stagnant mire.

After several hours the frightened agriculturist succeeded in getting to
town, and related a wonderful story of being attacked by fifty giants
fifteen feet high, mounted on fire breathing steeds, and carrying
twenty-five pound cannons in their hands!



                         THE DASH THROUGH DUNDAS


was made at full speed, causing the greatest excitement. All were now
mounted, but a horse taken from a farrier, Empey, near Northfield,
evidently found it difficult to keep pace with the trained nags belonging
to the robbers.

A short distance out of Dundas the gang stopped at a farm house and
borrowed a pail which they took to a spring near by. Here they paused long
enough to water their animals, and wash the desperate wound which Bob
Younger, (as was afterwards found) had received directly through his right
elbow, and which besides bleeding profusely had become almost unbearable,
even to a man of his determination and vigor. Throwing the pail by the
side of the road, the squad hastened on, little thinking of the pursuit
which was being organized in the rear.

As it is now known that the squad, as it now remained, consisted of Cole,
Jim and Bob Younger, Charlie Pitts, and probably the James boys, their
names will be used in this narrative hereafter, wherever they are known
from their own statements to have been.

As the horse taken from the farmer Empey of course wore no saddle, it
became necessary for the comfort of its rider that one be impressed. To
accomplish this, two of the gang called at the house of a farmer living a
short distance from the road, and telling that



                 THEY WERE OFFICERS AFTER HORSE THIEVES,


borrowed a saddle. This took place at 41/2 o'clock, and a half hour before,
the landlord of Cushman's Hotel in Millersburg saw the other four pass his
house on a gallop. He says that three of them stopped at his hostelry the
night before. He saw the other two pass some time later, but did not
recognize among the six, the man that made up four whom he had
entertained.

Mr. Cushman says the men were extremely well-behaved, using no liquor, and
indulging in no profanity or vulgarity. They retired early and arose late.
He speaks of one as evidently the leader, he appearing like a man who had
never done any manual labor. His horse was cared for by the others, and
his quiet directions were promptly obeyed. The men talked but little,
saying that they were from Illinois and were civil engineers looking over
the country, to decide upon the feasibility of building more railroads in
that section. This party had left Cushman's house at 9 o'clock Thursday
morning, and had leisurely ridden the ten miles to Northfield.



                               THE PURSUIT.


In the meantime there had been mounting in hot haste, and detachments in
wagons and on horses had started from Northfield to undertake to head off
the bandits on what is known as the Dodd road. This road the robbers
seemed to have missed, and, notwithstanding their earlier start, they did
not arrive at the town of Shieldsville, fifteen miles away, until after a
squad of five men had reached that point. These men were in a saloon
refreshing themselves and telling their wonderful tale, when the rough
riding marauders dashed up in front of the place. The boys were attracted
to the door by the noise of the horses' hoofs, and two or three started
for the wagon in which their arms had been left. This movement was
promptly checked by the leader, and the lads slouched back to the saloon.

The bandits leisurely proceeded to water their animals, and while doing so
an inquisitive old party standing by enquired "where they were going?" All
laughed at this query and one, pointing to Bob Younger whose arm was still
bleeding, replied that "they were going"



                        "TO HANG THAT D----D CUSS."


After having watered the horses the desperadoes seemed in no haste, but
practiced with their pistols on the pump shattering it to pieces. Soon,
however the order was given and all dashed away, going toward Waterville.

The dash and daring of the robbers had electrified the people of the town
so that nothing was done, but after they had got well off, the gallant
squad of pursuers started on the trail. Soon they were joined by others,
augmenting the force to seventeen, and the bandit band was sighted in a
ravine about four miles from Shieldsville. The attacking party opened fire
from the brow of a hill but their arms consisted of rusty shot guns, and
small pistols, hence nothing was accomplished. When the attack commenced
the bandits wheeled in platoon and discharged a harmless volley at the
pursuers.

The horse of one of the robbers fell, and it was supposed that he had been
shot, but he quickly recovered. As the bandit sought to mount him again,
he found his girth broken, and in obedience to an order from the chief, he
mounted behind his comrade, and the gang moved off at a round trot. The
abandoned horse was found to be the one taken from Empey, and the saddle,
the one borrowed near Millersburgh.



                               A BALKY NAG.


An hour or two later the bandits seem to have lost their road, for they
called at the house of a farmer named Sager, and demanded a horse, saying
they were after horse thieves. Sager is a prudent German, and required to
see their authority. They laughed at him and secured his horse, but on
attempting to mount him, they found him balky, and were obliged to abandon
their plan. They then forced the farmer to accompany them quite a distance
to point out the road, first asking the route to Waterville, but finally
deciding to take the Cordova road. Sager went with them to the edge of the
town of Kilkenny, and left them in a large meadow going towards Cordova.

In this field the bandits resorted to all known means to destroy their
tracks, and esconced themselves in the mysterious depths of the Big Woods,
where it was impossible to track them, as the thousands of hogs which root
up their living there, had almost entirely displaced the sod, and it was
not an easy matter to distinguish the footprints of man or beast.

Many have the impression that the bandits were sheltered Thursday night by
a notorious character living in the woods on the west side of Kilkenny,
but according to the statement of those captured, they lay hidden in the
thickets.



                          THE PURSUIT GROWS HOT.


During Thursday night excited crowds had gathered in all of the towns in
the vicinity that could be reached by telegraph. Men of every class
volunteered to join in the hunt, and they came armed and mounted in every
conceivable style. The great majority had arms of little account, and a
large portion of the volunteers were entirely defenceless. There were many
intrepid men who joined in the pursuit in an earnest manner, and many
younger ones who started as they would in a chicken hunt, for sport and
excitement.

The telegrams had summoned the chiefs of police, detectives and several
members of the police forces of St. Paul and Minneapolis, and at six
o'clock Thursday evening, Chief King, Detective Brissette, Sergeant Clarke
and patrolman Brosseau and deputy sheriff Harrison, of the former city,
and Chief Munger, Detective Hoy, and officers West, Hankinson, and
Shepherd, of the latter place, were on the scene of the tragedy.

Under direction of Chief King, the St. Paul squad followed the trail of
the robbers under charge of Detective Brissette, while Detective Hoy and
his party proceeded to Faribault intending to start from there and attempt
to head off the robber band. Every point of egress from



                              THE BIG WOODS


was thoroughly picketed during the night, probably two hundred volunteers
being engaged. Early on Friday morning Sheriff Asa Barton, of Rice county,
who had been up all night arranging the guards, commenced to accept new
recruits and dispatch them as rapidly as possible to the front, providing
every weapon that would snap a cap, that could be obtained in the
vicinity. His labors were arduous and incessant, but his splendid
constitution and indomitable perseverance enabled him to endure throughout
the three weeks that the hunt continued. The number of robber hunters
cannot have been less than five hundred during Friday.

The pursuers dispatched from Faribault were headed by brave, intelligent
men, among whom were Col. Williams, J. H. Harding, Dr. Hurd, T. Loyhed,
Mr. Baxter, James Hunter and Sam Dunham, chief of police of this city.

Nothing was heard of the bandits during Thursday night, but on Friday, it
was found that they had started in a westerly direction. It was difficult
to pick their trail, as men and horses shod in every manner had passed
over the roads during the night and morning. Rumors of all sorts came in
from all points, and the leaders scarcely knew what to do, but they wisely
determined to maintain their line of pickets.

It can truly be said that these knights of the road traveled on their
reputation, and they were looked upon as such desperate and sanguinary
foes that few men would have been willing to meet them except at
considerable odds. The pickets had been liberally placed, but the squads
were necessarily small, as an area of more than four miles square was
guarded. At most places only two or three guards had been placed, and
through one of these squads a



                             WONDERFUL ESCAPE


was made. It was supposed that the bandits would try to break the line at
a northerly point, toward Cordova, hence their track to the southwest was
unlooked for.

At seven o'clock Friday morning two men called at the house of a Mr.
James, on the Cleveland road, and asked his wife, he being away, if she
had seen anything of two little black mules that had strayed or been
stolen. Being answered in the negative, they asked how far the river was
behind the house, and if there were any swamps between. She told them the
river was about one-quarter of a mile back, and that there was a swamp
which she thought they could pass.

One of the men then inquired which direction was south. Mrs. James
informed him, when he said he guessed she was mistaken, but on taking out
a pocket compass, he acknowledged that she was correct, and made a polite
apology for contradicting her. On leaving, they bade her a pleasant "good
morning."

The gang then attempted to cross the Little Cannon river behind James'
house but could not get through the swamp, and returning they took to the
road going toward Waterville. After proceeding a short distance they
accosted a party of five men working on the road. They said they were in
pursuit of the robbers, and asked if the two bridges, one above and one
below were guarded. When told they were they asked if there were any fords
between. On learning that there were two, they said that they had better
take care of them, and immediately started across the fields to the river.

No sooner had the bandits left, than Mr. James, who had been told by his
wife of the visit of the men, came up. After a hurried consultation, in
which it was decided that the party that had just passed were the robbers,
James with three of the men hastened to the upper bridge about a quarter
of a mile away, and reported to Major Rogers, who with two men held that
point. A portion of the squad immediately started for the fords, James and
two others going to the lower, while Rogers and the remainder stopped at
the upper one about forty rods away.

The swamps and growth had retarded the progress of the bandits, but James
had scarcely gained his position when the gang appeared on the opposite
bank of the river leading their horses. They were carelessly talking, and
made directly for the ford. Just as the leader stepped into the shallow
stream, James exclaimed, "Come on boys,"



                           WE'VE GOT THEM NOW,


at the same time discharging an ineffective charge of small shot at the
front robber. At this the leader shouted, "This is too hot, boys, we must
take to the woods," and all hastened back up the bank. But as they moved
away, they must have heard the retreat of the pickets, who broke and ran,
one leaving his time-honored Prussian musket in the brush, and another
losing his valuable set of false teeth, for after moving up into the woods
for a distance of not more than twenty rods, they wheeled and crossed the
ford in the coolest and most deliberate manner. The alarm was immediately
carried to Waterville, and the base of operations were soon changed. In
the meantime the St. Paul party, with several active and intrepid
Northfield men, had been actively on the trail, and just at dusk a sight
of the enemy was obtained as they were breaking across a distant cornfield
for the cover of the woods.



                             TRADING HORSES.


But before this the bandits had visited the farm of Ludwig Rosseneau, in
Elysian township, and impressed two horses. The farmhouse is entirely
secluded from the road, being nearly half a mile back. When the gang
arrived there with their five horses, two of them went to the barn, while
four remained at a small bridge near by. Mr. Rosseneau and his son went to
see what they wanted, when they asked if he had any horses. One said he
was the Sheriff of Rice county, and that he must have two horses and a
guide, for he was after horse thieves, showing a large document, which the
boy Wilhelm, who had been to school, says was a map of Minnesota. When the
old man objected, the rascals drew their pistols and quickly closed the
bargain. Two horses were brought from the stable and saddled; one was
mounted by one of the gang, and the Rosseneau boy was forced to accompany
them on the other. The simple German peasants had heard nothing of the
Northfield tragedy, and hence were not particularly frightened, although
greatly annoyed. The cavalcade passed from the farm, the leader ordering
the boy to guide them through the woods to the old state road. It was a
difficult country to ride through, but the boy knew the road and traveled
along, talking in boyish style and getting short answers, until the chief
ordered him not to talk so loud. On arriving at an opening near the road,
a halt was made, and the lad was placed upon one of the robbers' horses,
which was disabled by a cruel gall caused by the girth under his forelegs.
He was told to remain there until they returned, which would be soon.
After waiting about half an hour, another lad came up and told him of the
robber raid. Young Rosseneau quickly understood his position and made
quick tracks for home. He says that after the robbers left him they dashed
into the woods across the clearing, and galloped away as fast as possible.
The next morning Rosseneau's horses were found in their pasture near the
barn.



                           ANOTHER HORSE TRADE.


Subsequently it was discovered that during the night of Friday a horse had
been taken from the pasture of John Laney, 11/2 miles from the village of
Elysian, and a handsome sorrel mare badly chest foundered placed in its
stead for value received. This farmer made a good trade as did Rosseneau,
for his own horse came home early Saturday morning.

The hunted bandits were in a country from which it seemed impossible for
them to escape, it being almost surrounded by lakes and swamps. A close
guard was kept, and all expected that a capture would surely be effected
on Saturday. There were hundreds of men on the hunt, but it is useless to
say that the search was thorough, for if it had been they would have been
found. Saturday passed and also Sunday, and no sign of them was
discovered. Many became discouraged and weary, and as the weather had been
wet and cold, large numbers of the pursuers returned to their homes.

However, the hunt was continued by many persistant men from all parts of
the Stale. As their labor was unrewarded by any discoveries of importance
until Monday and Tuesday, the symmetry of the narrative will be maintained
by following the robbers according to their own statements.



                             SAFE FOR AWHILE.


Up to Friday night they had succeeded in procuring food from farm-houses,
at one place going in and helping themselves to the entire cooking of the
family. Wild plums and grapes had also contributed to their wants, and
they had not suffered much, except Bob Younger whose wound was extremely
painful. After trading horses at Laney's, Friday night, they rode to a
point in the woods about three miles back of Elysian and a short distance
from German Lake. Here, less than one hundred and fifty yards from the
road, after turning loose the three borrowed horses, they tied their three
remaining horses to trees, and made a rude shelter with their rubber
blankets in which they passed the night cold and wretched.

Saturday morning they broke camp, and after tying their blankets around
themselves with their bridles, they abandoned their faithful steeds, and
started forth on foot, leaving five saddles behind them. They moved slowly
and cautiously, and during the forenoon they discovered a sort of island
which proved an excellent hiding place. In the center of this
little-explored tract, they found a pretty pond of water, and feeling
secure they established a regular camp, making a good fire, and taking
comfort generally. So safe did they feel that they shot a hog and a calf,
but not succeeding in killing them the first time, although the shots went
straight through their heads as they aver, and as the animals made good
time in escaping, they lost a savory feast, not daring to fire more shots.
During the most of the time the bandits had proceeded on foot leading
their horses through the woods, and their feet had become terribly sore
while their stockings were entirely worn out, and while resting here they
dressed their



                          LACERATED EXTREMITIES


and bound them up in socks improvised from their underclothing. But they
dared not rest here too long as the corn fields and potato-patches on
which they depended for subsistance were at an inconvenient distance, and
their hunters might flush their camp at any moment. Saturday night they
again took up their tedious march, and about daylight went into camp a
mile from the German Catholic church in Marysburgh, the bell of which was
plainly heard by the robbers when it rung for early mass. They concluded
not to attend church that day, contrary to the usual custom of Cole
Younger at least, and a luxurious breakfast of roasted corn and baked
potatoes was prepared. This camp was within a few rods of the edge of a
clearing, showing the remarkable boldness of the gang. Here two small boys
saw three of them walking just outside the woods, and reported it, but
little faith was placed on their story, as the general impression was that
the bandits were still in the woods behind Elysian or had made a break on
their horses to the Minnesota river, and hence to parts unknown. Their
camp of Friday night had not then been discovered; and it was supposed
that they were still in possession of their horses.

In all the time intervening between Thursday afternoon and Monday morning,
the robbers had made but about thirty miles, and although surrounded at
times by



                        AT LEAST FIVE HUNDRED MEN,


they would not have suffered at all except for the cold and rain. In the
Sunday camp a portion of a bloody shirt gave evidence that Bob Younger had
been compelled to again dress his wounded arm.

Slowly the robbers proceeded, and their next camp was some four miles
directly south of Marysburgh on the banks of Lake Madison in Blue Earth
county. From here a bold strike was made directly west nearly nine miles,
to a point but about 21/2 miles back of the city of Mankato, where, finding
an empty house in the woods on the Kron farm they slept comfortably Monday
and Tuesday nights. During the most of this time they had lived on fodder
corn uncooked, hazel nuts, grapes and wild plums, but Tuesday morning they
made a requisition on a German farmer and procured a good breakfast. At
the table they sat with their overcoats on, and their



                      BOWIE KNIVES BY THEIR PLATES.


They were uncommunicative, inoffensive and polite, and paid liberally for
the hospitality shown them.

The hunt had continued while the bandits were escaping as above related, a
reward of $1,000 offered by Governor Pillsbury, $700 by the Northfield
bank, and $500 by the Winona and St. Peter railroad inciting many to
action. The state reward was afterwards increased to $1,000 for each man
dead or alive. However all were off the scent, the objective point of the
pursuers being the woods back of Elysian from which the pursued had
quietly passed. The headquarters of the robber hunters were made



                              AT JANESVILLE.


On Saturday, Sept. 9th, a party consisting of A. A. Keller, Russell M.
Church, F. Martin and W. Rhine started across the country from Northfieid
to Faribault, and catching there the train, proceeded to Owatonna, where
they were joined by a party of some thirty well armed citizens.

Telegrams were sent to Waseca for a special train to carry them to
Janesville. Finding a case of needle guns at Owatonna for Brisette, they
took them on with them, arriving at Janesville at one o'clock. They found
Brisette and his men there. They had been on the track of the gang from
the first, often getting sight of them, and never for an hour losing their
trail till Saturday, when they failed to see them during the whole day.

Early in the morning the party was divided into companies and took to the
woods, determined to hunt the villains up. Besides the parties sent out in
squads to the woods, other parties were out in each direction up the
Winona and St. Peter R. R. on hand cars.

The whole country around Janesville was alive, and hundreds of volunteers
were rushing about in search of arms to join the pursuers. By noon on
Sunday there were at least three hundred men on the war-path, seeking for
the fugitives and anxious to secure some portion of the reward offered for
their capture.

The telegraph was kept in lively operation, and every rumor was sent from
point to point, and mounted messengers carried the news along the lines of
outposts, keeping the men well informed on the events of the day.

At about 3 o'clock a messenger came riding up to headquarters, his horse
reeking and foaming, and the man's manner portending news of the utmost
weight and importance. Hurrying in to the depot he handed the telegraph
operator a paper containing the information that the fugitives broke cover
near Elysian and were making for Waterville. To inquiries he answered that
three of the robbers were seen and one was riding a cream-colored horse,
and that the police were hard on their track.

Telegrams were at once sent to Eagle Lake, Owatonna, and other points,
repeating the exciting tale and asking that the posts along the line
between Waseca and Janesville be made especially strong--the supposition
being that the thieves would try to cross somewhere between those two
points. In prompt reply to these telegrams a special train was dispatched
containing over one hundred men, well-armed, from Northfield, Winona,
Rochester, Owatonna and Medford, and these were left in squads often
between Waseca and Janesville, twenty-two of them coming up for
instructions and news.

These twenty-two were under the command of C. Runnels. Many were



                           VETERANS OF THE WAR,


and they seemed to be under good discipline, all obeying their leader's
orders with alacrity. This party it was thought better to use as a company
of patrol, who were to visit the outposts between this section and Waseca.



                           THE ST. PAUL POLICE


and the five Northfield scouts came in about 9:30 o'clock Saturday night,
and to the surprise of numbers of people waiting for news, reported that
they had no news to tell. They knew nothing of the dispatch which had
awakened such lively interest.

The party had been out all day, having left Janesville at 8 o'clock with
four wagons and some on horseback. They proceeded first to Elysian and
passing round the lake then proceeded on to Marysburg, within four miles
of which they fell in with Hoy and



                         THE MINNEAPOLIS POLICE,


when all started by different routes to Eagle Lake, from thence they came
to Janesville after spending twelve long hours on the road, but throughout
their whole course they saw and heard nothing of the robbers.

Subsequent developments proved that the news brought in by the mounted
messenger was a canard founded on the fact that some of the robber hunters
had been amusing themselves by "playing robbers." The false alarm,
however, did no harm, and only stirred men to double diligence, and the
writer who spent the whole night of Sunday in visiting the outposts and
guards along the Winona & St. Peter railroad found them all on the _qui
vive,_ and he is confident if the bandits had shown themselves that night,
they would have fared badly.

The alarm telegraphed to St. Paul brought out again Chief King and another
body of police and citizens among whom was Hazen, of Cincinnati, who
thought he recognized in photographs of the two dead bandits, Bill
Chadwell and Charles Pitts.



                           FINDING THE HORSES.


Monday night, a party, headed by Sheriff Dill and Brissette, and including
the St. Paul police, and several determined men from Northfield, after a
tedious hunt arrived at the house of John Dehn about a mile from the place
where Brisette had lost the trail on Friday night.

The detective was in a quandary not understanding how the horses at least
could have got through the line of pickets that had been maintained. One
of these animals was of a dun color, or as the country people called it "a
yaller hoss," and would have been noticed among a cavalry regiment.

The mystery was soon to be solved however. A portion of the squad took
refuge in Dehn's hay loft for the night, and at daylight Tuesday morning
as Mr. Mills Church, of Northfield, an old war veteran, was peeping from
his roost, he saw two hard looking horses, peering over the farm gate,
evidently envying the inviting stack of oats within.

Church immediately went to them, and found they were two of the robbers'
horses without doubt. One was a bright bay with white face and three white
feet, and the other was a handsome brown mare. Both were very thin and
showed marks of exposure, and deep rowelling on their sides. The brown had
large galls each side of her back bone made by the saddle, and these were
covered by thick scabs that had been forming at least three days. Both
wore halters, that of the bay being without a strap, while a piece about a
foot long hung to the halter of the brown, it having been chewed off by
the wearer.

The nags were well cared for, and their trail was immediately taken up
while their tracks were fresh, but the horses had stopped to graze so
often thus doubling and changing their course, that it was almost a
fruitless task. Feeling that Dehn's house at which they were found was
probably the first one the horses saw, a



                         LONG LINE OF SKIRMISHERS


was formed, and a thorough search of the woods made. At about 7 o'clock
the left of the line came upon the last camp where the robbers were in
possession of their horses. Dr. Hurd of Faribault was in advance, and as
he came to the spot, the noted buckskin horse whinned and stamped showing
most unmistakable signs of delight at again seeing a human form. The camp
was located so near the road that it is a wonder that it had not been
discovered. At each of three saplings a horse had been tied, the yellow
one in the middle. They had been given as long range as possible, but
there was no feed for them except the bark and wood of the trees to which
they were tied. These were eaten as high as the horses could reach and
deep into the roots. The ground around was stamped hard, and there were
evidences that the poor animals had made desperate efforts to escape. At a
short distance away pronged stakes were found which showed that the
fleeing men had found shelter in a most uncomfortable manner. They had
probably thrown blankets over the frame and stopped to dress the wounded
man. There was no trace of eating or sleeping. Behind a log near by, all
the saddles of the five laid in a pile, an old russet-leather saddle, much
defaced, at the bottom of the pile, very wet. This showed two shot marks,
from one of which a medium-sized pistol bullet was taken. Two others on
the pile were black, solid-seat saddles, one new, open, black McClellan,
one new russet McClellan. The black McClellan was marked underneath, at
the front, $8.50, with the cost mark above: two old blankets and three old
gunny bags were found. The robbers carried away all the bridles and good
blankets.

The horses at Rosseneau's and Laney's were then procured and the entire
five were delivered to Commissioner Scott of Rice county, it being the
feeling that that community should have the benefit of what was recovered.



                              EXCITING NEWS.


Excitement had again subsided, and after the capture of the robbers'
horses in a state indicating that they had been abandoned for several
days, the opinion gained ground rapidly that the robbers had made tracks
on foot and were many miles away. The hunt had virtually come to an end,
was the thought of many, and a general movement was made by the pursuers
toward those homes to which of late, they had become strangers. The St.
Paul police had started for home, and the Minneapolis force was already
there. The indefatigable and energetic sheriff of Winona, was even
contemplating an abandonment of the chase when news was brought into
Mankato, which at once aroused excitement to its highest pitch. A farmer
had been captured by the bandits, and with arms tightly bound behind him,
compelled at the muzzle of a revolver to accompany them on the road to
pilot the way beyond Mankato. Hearing that this unfortunate was the man in
charge of Mr. Shaubut's farm, the writer sought out the man



                                 DUNNING,


who told him that about six o'clock on Wednesday morning the 13th, he
started from his house in search of the cows. He had scarcely passed the
barn going towards the woods when six men came upon him. They were for the
most part powerfully built men, well dressed, with linen dusters and
blankets strapped up in bridles. The men came up to him and said they were



                           LOOKING FOR ROBBERS,


and guessed he was one of them. He protested that he was not, when one
said they would take him with them anyhow, and proceeded to bind his hands
behind him with a bridle rein. They then insisted, upon his showing them
the way past Mankato, so that they might strike the Minnesota above,
asking him questions as to whether they would be likely to find any boats
upon the river, and if it was possible to ford or swim across. Dunning
begged them to let him go, when they told him they were



                         THE NORTHFIELD ROBBERS,


but if he would show them the way and keep a silent tongue in his head
they would send him a handsome present. He still begged to be released,
stating that he had a delicate wife and young children, and if he should
be away from the farm he would lose his situation, and then what would his
family do during the winter? The robbers thought he seemed a good sort of
a fellow, and if they could only trust him, perhaps they might let him
return, but could they trust him? Dunning protested by all that was sacred
that they might, and promised if they would only let him return home, he
would not breathe to a living soul that he had seen there and he expressed
a hope that they would get through safe and sound without being captured.
The robbers held a short consultation among themselves, in which Dunning
thought he heard proposals of shooting him on the spot. It was to him



                      A MOMENT OF DREADFUL SUSPENSE,


and he shook with very fear, but to his inexpressible relief one of the
men said that they had agreed to let him return home--they did not want his
family to suffer for them. They then asked him his name and postal
address, which they carefully noted down, repeating their former promise
of a handsome present if they got safely off, and if he kept his faith
with them.

One of the men asked if they could not get to the river from where they
were by leaving the timber and crossing the level open flat, and if they
could not swim the river easily. To which Dunning replied that they would
be discovered almost immediately if they attempted to leave the woods,
advising them to keep under cover as much as they could. With this they
released his arms and set him free, they the while seating themselves upon
the ground and watching him till he got out of sight. He at once ran home,
and after getting his breakfast, he crossed over from his house to the
residence of Mr. Shaubut, and told him the whole story.



                               MR. SHAUBUT,


who is a banker in Mankato, brought the news to town, which set the whole
city into commotion. Men of all classes hurried about for arms. The
telegraph wires called up from Janesville the few men who still lingered
there reluctant to give up the chase. The same lightning messenger brought
men from Winona, Waseca, Owatonna, and Faribault. St. Peter, and Le Sueur
sent in their quota of armed citizens. The message found the redoubtable
Hoy at the Nicollet hotel, where he was narrating to an admiring throng
his exploits at Elysian, and brought him back to the regained trail; the
same message arrested the St. Paul police on their homeward journey at
Blakely, and, in an incredibly short time



                         A THOUSAND EAGER HUNTERS


crowded into the streets of Mankato seeking information and anxious for
orders. The ubiquitous Dill was there with his disciplined men. Baxter was
there and Sheriffs Finch, Davis, Barton, Long and Harrison, Mayor Wiswell
and Captains Holmes and Owens. Thus were the counties of Winona, Blue
Earth, Rice, Waseca, Faribault and Ramsey represented by their sheriffs
and men. The five Northfield boys, who had never for an hour given up the
hunt, were there and ready again to guard, mount and scour the woods.

Davis, of Winnebago, whose story of the robbers' appearance the evening
before at Indian Lake, was so little heeded, was now almost lionized, and
it was surprising how many were all at once found who believed in the
famous horse thief catcher from the first.

It was necessary that some system be pursued; accordingly General Pope, of
Mankato, was appointed generalissimo of the forces, and that gentleman at
once set about a plan of organization. Bridges must be guarded,
cross-roads and by-paths watched, patrols sent out, and skirmish lines
established. One would think by the measured tramp of armed men, the
bustle, the eager excitement, the groups of mysterious gossips, that
Mankato expected a seige from the combined forces of all the hostile
savages paying allegiance to Sitting Bull, rather than that the men were
called out to capture six fugitive robbers.

But the people seemed determined. Their looks seemed to say that they were
tired of playing this game of hide and seek, and were for once in
downright earnest and bent upon bringing this thing to a quick and
decisive close.

It was a miserably wet morning, the rain descending in a continuous
shower, and the air was filled with a damp chilliness, which rendered
out-door vocations particularly disagreeable. The streets and roads were
filled with slimy mud--griming and sticking, to the intense misery of
pedestrians. But the rain and the mud and the cold could not deter the
excited populace, and even women caught the infectious fever of excitement
and dared the elements in search of news. All the city was on the tip-toe
of expectancy, but the hours glided slowly along and no news was brought
in from the skirmish lines or outposts. Reports, it is true, were rife,
and many a thrilling tale of manly courage and sanguinary encounter was
whispered by mani-tongued rumor. At one time the robbers were all
slaughtered, at another, a brave citizen was sacrificed, but enquiry
proved them to owe their existence to fertile imaginations. Evening at
last closed in upon a miserable day, and the tired, wet and hungry hunters
began to return. The Clifton house was filled with them, the congenial
host doing his best to appease their ravenous appetites, after which the
weary men stretched themselves at length upon the floors of the parlors,
offices and halls to snatch a few minutes' refreshing slumber. Meantime a
strong guard was placed at every point around the city, and mounted men
patrolled the streets all night.

At about midnight some of the men on guard heard peculiar whistles at
different points, which seemed to be replied to, the call resembling the
low note of the quail, and the answer, the high note of the same bird.
Report was made of the circumstance at "Headquarters," and while a
discussion was progressing as to whether the men were not mistaken, and
their ability to distinguish between the veritable bird call and its its
imitation, a mounted messenger came dashing in with the news that three of
the robbers had



                           CROSSED THE BRIDGE,


over the Blue Earth river and had escaped toward South Bend. The news
spread like a prairie fire, and in an incredibly short time the streets
were alive with armed men hastening down toward the point at which the
fugitives had broken the line of outposts. Sheriff Dill, who, had retired
but a few minutes to the well-deserved comfortable bed put at his disposal
at the Clifton, was soon up and away with a posse of men. Other leaders
were equally alert, but all mentally, and some physically, too, cursed the
blundering guard, which had permitted itself to be caught napping. Enquiry
soon ascertained the fact that



                         SOME ONE HAD BLUNDERED.


It appears that General Pope in arranging for the night guard had provided
for a strong body of men being placed upon each of the bridges over the
Blue Earth, this being considered the vulnerable point in the line, but a
telegram coming to him stating that the railroad bridge would be specially
guarded by the railroad officials, he removed his guard from that
structure, and, as it proved, opened a direct way for the brigands'
escape. The railroad authorities had placed two men and a boy on the
bridge to guard it, and about two o'clock they saw three men approaching
in single file. The guard stood on one side and the men advanced and
walked deliberately on to the trestle work and passed over, the heroic
guard being too much frightened to even breathe. As soon as the fugitives
had got fairly past, the boy rushed down to the covered bridge and alarmed
the guard there, who at once sent a mounted messenger into the city to
tell the miserable tale. Nothing during the whole hunt had such a
humiliating effect upon the people as this fiasco, but they were doomed
ere long to receive as great a disappointment.

The night was one of almost Egyptian darkness, and men could do little
good tramping through muddy lanes and through dripping woods without a
trail to guide them. The resolve, therefore, was to await the break of
day, when at the earliest hour of dawn a close hunt and hot pursuit would
commence. Accordingly with the gloaming, Hoy, of Minneapolis, with a
number of Mankato men and others, started out and they were soon shown



                                 A TRAIL


which led across the railroad bridge along the Sioux City line into a
melon patch, back to the road and on across the Garden City road. The
engineer of an incoming train motioned the pursuers toward the thick woods
covering the slopes of Pigeon Hill, some two hundred yards from the State
road. But on went the chattering, noisy trail-hunters, chasing each other
up the line. Quickly they came to a halt and found they had overrun the
trail. Doubling upon their tracks they came back several yards and found
the foot-prints turned off into the woods. Their attention was now
attracted by a strong smell of burning feathers, and looking up toward the
beautifully wooded acclivity, they saw a thin, pale column of smoke
issuing from the luxurious foliage and spreading itself out like a hazy
film.

At this point there seems to be conflicting statements as to what was
done, some asserting that Hoy at once made a dash toward the campfire;
others say that he spent several minutes consulting and ordering his own
men back to Garden City road to surround the camp. One man, Mr. Hansen, of
Mankato, says that he actually saw one of the robbers and wanted to fire,
but Hoy would not let him, stating that he might hit some of the pursuers
instead of the pursued. Both Cole and Bob Younger afterward stated that
Hoy did not charge into the camp at all. Be this as it may, the camp when
entered was found to be deserted. When the writer entered the



                              ROBBER'S CAMP,


a bright, clear fire was burning, in front of which, toward the railroad,
a long pole was wedged in between some saplings, over which had been hung
the coats and blankets of the band. The front part of a shirt was found,
stained with blood. One wristband was wanting, but that found at the camp
discovered on the previous Sunday, exactly corresponded with it. The shirt
was of good quality and had evidently never been laundried. Bob Younger
afterwards told the writer that the garment belonged to him. A
blood-stained handkerchief (new) with border torn from two sides was
found, with a large blue weather-proof coat, a brown linen duster, nearly
new, a piece of drugget about two yards square and two bridles. One of the
bridles had a very severe Mexican bit, and was afterwards recognized by a
Mankato man as being one that he had exchanged at St. Peter for a milder
one. Near the fire were two fowls and a chicken skillfully dressed and
jointed ready for broiling, and several cobs of corn, some of it partially
roasted, and some of it showing marks of teeth, as though some of the men
were too hungry to wait till breakfast was ready. At the back of the camp
fire the hill ascended precipitously, and in the dead leaves were
distinctly seen the trail of the disturbed bandits. Reaching the summit of
Pigeon Hill, they crossed the Garden City road and entered the heavy
timber and dense underbrush leading down to the Blue Earth river. The
whole of this wood was filled with men, a party of about two hundred men
forming a skirmish line about three paces apart and marching completely
through it down to Jones' ford. It was now about mid-day, and it was
thought the outlaws had doubled on their track and were concealed
somewhere in the thick coverts of



                           BEAUTIFUL MINNEOPA.


Accordingly toward this lovely spot were the forces concentrated, and all
the afternoon the wide space fronting the Rev. D. T. Rowland's residence
was filled with armed men. Although this delightful spot is well known to
pleasure-seekers, it is doubtful if ever before it was the scene of so
much bustle and animation, and the two beautiful daughters of the reverend
gentleman were kept busily employed attending to the wants of their
countless guests.

The whole neighborhood was thoroughly searched, the deep and shadowing
glen, the rocky chasms, the towering heights were all searched through and
through, not a thicket nor a cave, nor a gloomy recess in the tortuous
course of the serpentine Minneinneopa escaped the ruthless tread of the
pursuers. No one could form an adequate idea of the number of men engaged
in the hunt if they remained themselves with one party or in one place. As
the writer was taken from one point to another, along highways and by ways
by a spirited span of colts, supplied by Mr. B. D. Pay, he was astonished
at the number of skirmishers he met. There were men of



                     ALL AGES AND ALL NATIONALITIES,


mounted and on foot, shadowed by every tree and covered by every bush.
Could it be possible for an escape through such a formidable line!

Driving up from Rush Lake towards evening weary and hungry from the day's
exertion, the writer was hailed by three men hastening across from heavy
timber to the right of the Garden City road.  Halting, he was told
excitedly that the three men crossing from Garden City came upon a dense
thicket overhanging the Blue Earth river where they heard voices. They
stopped and listened when they distinctly heard a voice.

"There is a good shelter here, why should we move."

It was raining at the time. The men from Garden City waited and watched,
but they saw nothing. After some time they fired off their shot guns, but
no response was made. For four hours the men kept guard over the place,
and as night was coming on they thought they would go out in search of
help.

The writer at once alighted from his buggy and being joined by some dozen
armed men, they approached the spot indicated. The cover was almost
impenetrably dense, and it was impossible to see a dozen yards in any
direction, and the hunt ended in failure, some of the party believing that
the three men from Garden city had given way to a strong imagination. But
at



                     AN INTERVIEW WITH THE YOUNGERS,


at Madelia, the writer was told that after leaving the camp at Minneopa
Falls, the band went in a south-easterly direction to the Blue Earth, and
then followed up the river for half an hour where they lay in a dense
thicket all day. The men in concealment heard the pursuers, heard the
shots, and saw one at least of the party within easy pistol range of them.
At nightfall many of the hunters returned to Mankato, but still more
remained out all night performing picket duty after an arduous day's march
through the woods and over a rough country.



                            THE LINE ADVANCED.


The search of Thursday having proved fruitless, as night approached the
line was thrown some five miles in advance due west, and a cordon of
pickets was stretched from Judson, on the Minnesota river, to Garden City,
on the Watonwan river, a distance of at least thirteen miles. The line
passed through the village of Lake Crystal, the pickets being liberally
disposed at all of the roads, crossings, fords and ferries. Brissette,
Harrison and Clark, aided by W. Erwin, of St. Paul, (a most admirable
organizer and active commander,) and Baxter, of Faribault, having charge
of the arrangements, and acting under the orders of Gen. Pope, who had
changed his headquarters to Lake Crystal. The town board of that place
responded with the most commendable promptitude to every expressed desire
of the leaders, providing provisions for a large number of men and horses,
and furnishing transportation for the pickets to their several locations.

At an early hour in the evening the picketing was completed, and the
commander-in-chief with his aids watched through the night, momentarily
expecting the arrival of



                           COURIERS WITH NEWS,


everything being arranged to mass a great number of men at any point from
which tidings of the bandits should be received. Shortly after midnight
startling news was brought in, and it transpired that the wily bandits had
again selected the weakest place in the line, and succeeded in passing a
stupid crowd of sleepy pickets.




A NEW DEPARTURE.



                             ANOTHER ESCAPE.


It appears that at a crossing over a small creek on the outskirts of Lake
Crystal, ten guards had been placed. Nine of them had procured hay and
ensconced themselves in the bushes to enjoy a quiet sleep. A young man
named Richard Roberts, of Mankato, alone was faithful to his trust, and
while the others slept he kept his ceaseless vigil. The night was pitchy
dark, but the brave boy had become accustomed to it, and his ear was
rendered wonderfully acute. At about midnight he thought he heard the
sound of horse's hoofs on the deep sand of the road, and he got a position
where if any one passed he could read the outlines against the sky. Soon a
horse appeared bearing two riders.

Stepping from his bush he cried "halt," when the two men slid over to the
further side of the horse. Dick then raised his rifle, and as the bandits
undertook to rush their horse past him, he fired. The animal gave a start,
throwing his riders, and ran rapidly away.

The two men must have been hit in the legs, but they were not disabled,
for they immediately gained their feet and dashed into a cornfield near
by, where their trail was lost until morning. In falling they made deep
indentions in the sand, and one lost his hat, which was of fine make and
nearly new. Before young Roberts had time to start in pursuit, the
frightened horse again dashed by him in hot haste to his home about two
miles back. Early in the morning of Friday a farmer named John Vincent
came into town, and reported that one of his horses had been used by the
robbers during the night.



                            BORROWING A HORSE.


All of the farmers in the vicinity had been warned to take the strictest
care of their horses for fear that the robbers would appropriate them. In
accordance with these suggestions Mr. Vincent had turned his horses into a
concealed meadow, and locked his barn strongly, after removing all except
his cart harness to the house. However, the cunning robbers found the
animal, and breaking into the barn improvised a bridle with a halter and
an old bit, cutting the long lines of the cart harness for reins, girth
and stirrups. The next morning the poor old black horse, which bore an
admirable reputation for honesty, was found meekly standing in the door
yard evidently ashamed of the Tam O'Shanter ride in which he had assisted.
He was dirty, and lame, and his sides bled from the wounds inflicted by
the cruel spurs of the bandits.



                            ON THE NEW TRAIL.


A large number of hunters were soon on the scene of the affair and efforts
were made to follow the trail with lanterns, but nothing was accomplished
except to establish the identity of the robbers by the impress of a boot
leaving a



                        SMALL HEEL AND SQUARE TOE,


and which had been the guiding mark wherever the trail had been struck. At
daylight the trail was found by the impatient hunters, and it was rapidly
followed to the Seymour farm about four miles away across the fields. Here
the fleeing villains had unceremoniously helped themselves to a splendid
team of large gray mares, owned by Geo. Rockwood, who was engaged in
haying on the farm. These animals were reputed to be the best in the
county, and their subsequent achievements proved that their reputation was
merited. The robbers had appropriated bridles, but finding no saddles they
proceeded, riding bareback. It is supposed that they stole these horses at
about three o'clock Friday morning, and it was nearly six o'clock before
it became known, so that pursuit could be organized.

Couriers were dispatched to recall the pickets, and no time was lost in
arranging a pursuit.



                           BREAKFAST AND A HAT.


Soon news arrived by telegraph that the robbers had called at the house of
a farmer named Jackson, two miles northwest of Madelia, at 6 o'clock, and
asked for something to eat. On being told that breakfast was not ready,
and urged to dismount and wait for it, they said they did not want
breakfast, only a loaf of bread. The good wife gave them what they asked
for, and they insisted upon paying for it. Mrs. Jackson finally accepted
ten cents.

One of the visitors was hatless, and he asked if they could not provide
him with an old one, as his had blown off into a swamp. Mrs. Jackson said
that they had only a new one which she had bought for her son the day
before. This the robber persuaded her to sell him for $1.50, and then both
started off at a brisk pace.

At 1:30 p. m., the fugitives called at the farm of Andrew Nelson, four
miles directly west of Madelia, and asked a few questions in regard to the
roads, and at two o'clock they called at another house on the same errand.
They made excellent headway, for later in the afternoon they were seen
near Mountain Lake, some seventeen miles from Madelia. The alarm had been
flashed ahead over the wires, and squads were turning out from all points
in hot pursuit.



                        CAVALRY RAID BY RAILROAD.


As soon as possible a special train consisting of an engine and two
box-cars was dispatched to Lake Crystal and placed at the disposal of Gen.
Pope, by the active and accommodating manager of the Sioux City railroad.
Two squads of eight carefully chosen men each were detailed to proceed
under command of Sheriff Barton, of Rice county, and Detective Hoy, of
Minneapolis. Barton's detachment transported eight horses, but Hoy decided
to rely upon the farmers for his stock.  The former went directly to
Windom, and the latter to Mountain Lake, from which points they started
north, hoping to intercept the robbers. However, their efforts were
futile, as it was subsequently learned that the desperadoes had passed,
and were headed in a northwesterly direction.



                        ON THE BOUNDLESS PRAIRIE.


On the evening of Friday, the railroad was again resorted to and a squad
was dispatched to a point certainly in advance of the bandits, hoping to
arouse the inhabitants away from the railroad and telegraph. On the train
was Sheriff McDonald, of Woodbury county, Dakota territory, and it was
arranged between him and Sheriff Dill, who led the squad, that he should
proceed immediately to Sioux City, organize two squads, and make for Sioux
Falls by two routes. An account of the last days of the hunt for these two
fugitives in this State will be found in the following special telegram
forwarded by the writer to the St. Paul _Pioneer-Press._



                            THREE DAYS' HUNT.


"I took the train for Heron Like, with Sheriff Dill and ten men, including
Brissette, Clark, Harrison, Brosseau, Gail, Avery, Richardson and Church.
Arrived there at 11:30, roused the inhabitants, and were soon under way in
teams for Lake Shetek. The citizens were eager to assist and ready to go
to the front. At sunrise took a farmer's family by surprise, but got a
good breakfast, our tired squad tumbling into warm beds. We were left by
the inmates of the house to sleep an hour and a half, and then started,
feeling better for a chicken stew. Reached the town of Currie, Lake Shetek
township, at noon. Traveled in heavy farm wagons over bad roads. Here
found the little community ready to assist in any way. Our theory was that
the robbers would take"



                   ONE OF THREE TRAILS PASSING BETWEEN


Shetek and Luverne, and on the way out left six pickets to guard the lower
trails--Brissette, Clark and Brosseau, one squad; three Winona men another;
Erwin and Harrison were mounted well and served as scouts. It was thought
that the most likely course for the robbers was by the upper trail, hence
the scouts accompanied the commander, in order to communicate with the
pickets eight and five miles below. Dill quickly found men at his
disposal, and soon had twenty pickets posted north and south. Just at
night Erwin and Harrison dashed in and reported that the robbers had
called at the house of Mr. Swan, at the crossing of the Des Moines river,
Lime Creek township, five miles south of Shetek, at two. This was on
Saturday. There was only a woman at the house. The description of the
outlaws was accurate. They were still on the gray horses, stolen near Lake
Crystal. They did not get off their horses, and asked for bread. The woman
asked them to come in, but they declined, and after they got bread and
milk, they asked for meat. They said they were after horse-thieves, and
started southwest. Later they were seen at the Lutheran church, in the
town of Center, Murray township, from which point they went southwest,
striking the



                        LAST HOUSE ON THE FRONTIER


at section twenty-two, town one hundred and six, range forty-one, at 4:30.
They were tracked here by Avery, Gail and Richardson, of Winona, and a
courier brought the news to the scouts. This news caused Dill to decide
that they were making for the "Lost Timber," a natural hiding place.
Recruits were called for and couriers dispatched to call in the pickets in
other directions, to concentrate on that point. A squad consisting of
thirty was raised, ten being mounted. No time was lost, and through the
cold, dismal night,



                              A FORCED MARCH


was made to Lowville, where we arrived in a big thunder storm, at one,
Sunday morning. Rested here for a hot lunch at Bartlett Low's until five
o'clock, when the extra horsemen started across the broad prairie to the
famous "Lost Timber," which it was calculated was in advance of the
robbers, as it was supposed they must rest after their superhuman efforts.
The roads were heavy. We reached the destination at ten, and found Erwin
and Harrison with six riders, who had been skirmishing all night at the
spot, and had established



                            CAMP COLE YOUNGER.


They had picketed their horses in a deep ravine, and deployed men on the
row of high mounds commanding the prairie, and five miles down "Lost
Timber" valley. On arriving there, Dill's pickets were carried out three
miles each way, and a watch kept for four hours. Scouts were sent down the
valley, and and the pockets or ravines examined. At two p. m., no tidings
being received, a council was held, and it was agreed that the robbers
must have changed their route. Dill had been sanguine in regard to the
Luverne route, and he, Church of Northfield, and I took a team for that
point, leaving most of the party to push on to Pipestone, on the northern
trail, knowing plenty of men could be started from Luverne. A ride of
twenty tedious miles brought us to this point at 7:30 p. m. Found the town
in an uproar of excitement, as news had been sent from Worthington and a
special train dispatched with twenty men to guard the trail passing the
town. About noon Sunday, a man named Rolfe, living eleven miles north of
town, on the west bank of Rock river, came in and reported, that at 7:30
while he was away from the house, two men called at his house and asked
for breakfast. They got off their gray horses, and went into the house.
The woman asked them to take off their rubber coats. They refused to do
so, and seemed very lame, and shuffled along,



                        UNABLE TO LIFT THEIR LEGS.


Mrs. Rolfe asked if they were sick. One said their horses had ran away and
broke the wagon on the prairie, and they were forced to take to horse. He
said he had got the rheumatism and his comrade had broken two ribs in
falling from the wagon. This one gave evidence of a bad wound in the right
side, and could scarcely sit up to eat breakfast. He refused tea and asked
for milk. When they paid for their breakfast they did not unbutton their
coats, but reached up under. It took a long time to mount, and they had to
climb upon the fence and slide on to their horses. Both wore rubber coats,
one torn on the right side, and one had fine boots with small heel and
square toes. The boots were red from walking through the grass. They had
bags filled with straw for saddles, and old ropes looped for stirrups.
They moved slowly away southward. The robbers stopped at the house of
Davis, in Springwater, and were given bread and butter. They staid fifteen
minutes. From here they crossed the road northward from Luverne. As these
reports came in, the citizens were roused and the



                             PURSUIT WAS HOT.


They had been noticed by parties driving into town. At three they were
seen by Mr. Howard, who thought they were pleasure riders. They drove on a
high knoll and surveyed the country then traveled on at a moderate gait.
Shortly after, Sheriff Rice and three others in pursuit came very near
them, so they could have reached them with their rifles, but were



                             AFRAID OF THEM,


and were blamed for not shooting. This party followed seven miles without
attacking, and lost the trail after dark, three miles east of the
Palisades, on Splitrock river, in Dakota. About half an hour after, Rice
met a boy who said they had passed, and told him some fellows were
following, giving him



                           A VULGAR INVITATION


to report to the pursuers. They evidently felt easy, as they were in
familiar territory, and asked the boy where they could cross the river. He
directed them to two crossings, and they started towards the lower, but
had not crossed at six. They were in a country hard to hunt, full of
knolls and ravines. The stage from Sioux Falls this afternoon brought in
the two gray horses, which were found at the house of Mr. Nelson, on
Splitrock river, below the Palisades. The robbers called there between six
and eight o'clock Sunday evening. Kelson lit a pipe and sat on the fence
talking. One robber asked if he was



                      GOING TO SIT THERE ALL NIGHT,


and inquired about the fords and roads. After Nelson went in, the outlaws
changed their grays for his two horses, both black and blind, one in both
eyes, and the other in one. Nelson saw their revolvers. They rode the
blacks until two o'clock Monday morning, but made only ten miles, when
they changed for a pair of grays, five miles north of Sioux Falls. The
blind horses probably did not suit them. They went through Sioux Falls
about five Monday morning, and overtook the Yankton stage. They asked the
driver where he was going. The driver told them, and asked them the same
question. The robbers did not answer, but turned back into Sioux Falls.
This is



                              THE LAST SEEN


of the two supposed to be the James brothers, as far as known in this
State. Their course has been almost directly west by compass. I think they
would have taken the northern trail, but were driven south by Dill's
division in that direction. The fugitives were robbed of rest they
intended to take, and were forced to make eighty miles without stopping,
thus showing that they had good horses.

Various reports have been received recently in regard to the escaped
bandits, but they are probably safely away and among their old familiar
scenes.

A few determined spirits followed into Dakota, but the great body of the
pursuers returned disappointed to their homes, and resumed their
avocations, only to be again stirred and inspired in a few days by the
remarkable events which will be found in the succeeding chapter.




THE CAPTURE.



                            "WHAT'S THE USE?"


was the bitter ejaculation of pretty well every man who had for two long
weeks persistently kept on the trail of the gang of desperadoes who
perpetrated the Northfield outrage, and by Wednesday evening, the 20th,
the pursuers had for the most part returned to their homes with the full
conviction that the chase was up, and the bandits had made good their
escape. To some it was more than humiliating that after so many times
being completely within their grasp, the scoundrels had succeeded in
eluding them, and this too, so often through blundering and neglect. It
seemed no consolation that the robbers had lost more in the State than
they had ever done elsewhere. The two dead carcasses at Northfield, the
captured horses, the wounded, fleeing men were impotent to assuage their
disappointment and heal their wounded pride.

Many exciting reports came from all quarters, but they were only met with
incredulous laughter. The bandits were gone, and that was an end to the
matter. People began to look upon the whole hunt as a huge joke, and
admiration soon showed itself for the plucky six who could in the face of
such fearful odds make good their escape. But there were those who still
thought that at least four of the robbers were still in the
neighborhood--the man wounded at Northfield, and the three who had not
crossed the river, for notwithstanding the fact that J. Devans, of South
Bend, said that he saw _five_ men in South Bend, whom he was positive were
the robbers, on the morning that the three crossed the bridge, no one gave
credence to his tale.

This man asserted that he had occasion to get up about half-past two
o'clock to get some water at the pump, his wife being sick, when he passed
five men in the lane near South Bend Hotel. They wore long linen dusters
with belts, and carried blankets done up in bridles, and he was positive
they were the robbers. He saw them leave and go on to the railroad, two
walking ahead, and the fifth man who was taller than the others, walking
behind and seeming to stoop greatly and walk with difficulty, carrying one
arm in a sling. Bob Younger's statement to the writer seemed to confirm
Devan's story.

There were not a few people in Mankato who believed that Jack O'Neil had a
hand in the escape of the raiders. It will be remembered that this man
figured conspicuously as an informant in a case spoken of at an early
period of this narrative. Rumor had it that this O'Niel had still in his
vicious den the wounded man concealed. To satisfy the public mind, a
strong body of men crossed over the ferry and thoroughly searched O'Niel's
premises in which were found, besides the unfortunate female denizens,
five as low looking vagabonds as were ever seen outside of prison walls.
Although the search was fruitless, there are many people in Mankato who
still think, now that the hunt is over, that the notorious Jack cleared
his house of Ingalls, Peabody and Quane, because he expected the
Northfield raiders on their return trip to stay and make use of his house.
Many arrests were made of innocent persons in the eagerness to catch the
robbers, and it was absolutely dangerous to be a large man of unusual
appearance, especially to be alone in the woods or on country roads. There
was one instance of a capture on suspicion which placed two horse thieves
within the grasp of inexorable justice, that of the capture of the two men
at St. Peter, who stayed at the old Wardlow place one night and rode off
suspiciously at an early hour of the morning. These men who gave their
names as John Chafer and George Ranks, proved to be two horse thieves from
Iowa.

But the hunt was at last given up in despair and people had gone back to
their homes, when a lad came dashing into Madelia shouting out to every
one he met, that the



                           ROBBERS WERE FOUND.


Exhausted and out of breath from his long and rapid ride, it was some few
moments ere he could sufficiently recover himself to tell an intelligent
story. To Col. Vought, the landlord of the Flanders Hotel, the boy gave
his statement.

The following is condensed from the sworn statement of the captors, and
was published in the "_Madelia Times:_"

Early on Thursday morning, September 21st, a Norwegian boy named Oscar O.
Suborn, while out milking, saw two men pass his father's house. This boy
lives eight miles from this place in a direction a little west of north,
in Linden township, Brown county. In a few moments, he set down his pail
and went to the house of Mads Ouren, and told what he had seen. Besides
Mr. Ouren, there were there, Anton Anderson, Ole Stone and J. F. Devine.
The latter said at once he believed it was the robbers, and that the
people should be notified. Those there proceeded at once to do so. A gang
were commencing to thresh nearby, so their horses and all others in the
vicinity were ran off as fast as possible. The boy returned home and was
there told that during his absence, the two other men had come to the
house and called for something to eat. Said they were a fishing party,
were in a hurry and could not stop for breakfast. The boy then jumped upon
his father's horse and came full speed to this place with the news. When
within a mile and a half of town, his horse fell down and threw him off
into the mud, but he re-mounted and hastened on. Arriving here, the first
he saw were Sheriff Glispin and T. L. Vought. The latter grasped his gun,
mounted his horse and was off, closely followed by J. Severson. They were
soon joined by Sheriff Glispin, after having left orders to others to
come, and Will Estes. About three or four miles out they were met by a
young man named Flittie, who



                           HAD SEEN THE ROBBERS


and guided them to where the villains were. When the party came in sight
of the robbers, the latter were at the house of John Sharphold. Seeing
their pursuers coming they seemed to try to fortify behind a heap of
earth, but when the party scattered out in an attempt to surround them,
they made off. They waded in a slough near by, and when passing over a
rise of ground beyond, Glispin and Will Estes fired at them with their
rifles, just grazing the shoulder and cutting the shirt of one, as they
afterwards learned.

This caused the miscreants to hasten their pace, and while those pursuing
were crossing the slough and going cautiously up the hill (fearing an
ambuscade,) they had made quite an advance. As they were on foot, it was
now evident from the direction they were taking that they knew the
country, and were making for Doolittle's herd. It was not long before they
reached the Hanska slough which they waded, The party in pursuit, who were
proceeding in a form of line, came to the slough and finding they could
not cross, Glispin and Estes went down the slough and crossed at the house
of A. Swingler, who showed them a cattle crossing. The Sheriff sent
Severson to show those citizens coming, which way to proceed. Vought went
up stream and crossed, and about this time was joined by Dr. Overholt, and
coming down to the right of the robbers, fired occasionally to attract
others. Dr. Overholt shot with his rifle and hit one of the robber's
canes. Glispin and Estes coming up on the left, fired several shots, and
the robbers returned the fire, and being at close range, the bullets flew
thick about the pursuers, grazing Glispin's horse.

About half past 12 o'clock Will Estes ran out of ammunition and was
obliged to come to town, informing those whom he met where to go, and as
soon as he arrived here sent telegrams to St. James of movements.

In the pursuit, Glispin, Vought and Overholt saw Doolittle's herd and bore
to the right to prevent the robbers from capturing the horses, and crossed
the river at J. Doolittle's; some men were ordered to stay there as guard.



                        FINDING THEMSELVES FOILED


the bandits went to the river opposite Andrew Andersen's house and called
to him to bring over his horses, that they were after the robbers. He took
the hint however and ran the horses off. The robbers then passed up the
river to the next house and crossed at a ford; then passed through
Anderson's cornfield to a granary, then seeing teams that Mr. Horace
Thompson, President of the First National Bank of St. Paul, had out
hunting, they started east toward them, but Mr. Thompson and his son put
coarse shot in their guns and faced them, seeing which the robbers turned
north down the bluff and crept along in a band in the brush to the bank of
the river.

Sheriff Glispin, and others, came down to Andersen's house, and citizens
arriving, the Sheriff posted pickets along the bluff on the south side of
the river, to watch the robbers. Among these, August Fedder and Wm.
Shannon were by the house, Ole Stone on the bluff, and G. W. Green on a
point east of the picket line on the north side. At this time J. Dolittle
came down and said the guards at his house had gone, and the Sheriff, T.
L. Vought and Dr. Overholt returned there to see to it, and the latter was
stationed there by the Sheriff.

Meanwhile citizens were arriving on the north side of the river, and some
of them saw the robbers go into the brush. About 1 o'clock Capt. W. W.
Murphy arrived and having definitely ascertained where the villains were,
and also that the citizens were unorganized, all willing but no one
deciding what to do, he appeared to take in the situation immediately and
at once took command and found every one well pleased to obey. After
giving directions concerning the horses, he led forward to the north bank
of the river, the stream being about 20 feet wide, and the prairie
reaching to the water edge. Here he posted the men at equal distances,
each with instructions how to act. The names of the men so posted were
Geo. P. Johnston, T. Toren, W. H. Borland, C. Pittis. D. Campbell, Geo.
Carpenter, Joe Crandall, H. Juveland, H. H. Winter, Chas. Ash, E. H. Bill,
E. A. Loper, J. E. Smith, D. Brayton, J. A. Gieriet, Jack Delling, W. H.
H. Witham, Robt. Shannon, W. Bundy, Isaac Bundy, G. Christopherson, and in
a few moments these were joined by F. D. Joy, G. W. Yates, H. P.
Wadsworth, O. C. Cole and several others.

                [DIAGRAM OF THE BATTLE FIELD AT MADELIA.]

                 DIAGRAM OF THE BATTLE FIELD AT MADELIA.


After giving instructions on the north side of the river, Capt. Murphy
mounted his horse, and crossed the river on a bridge to the east of where
the robbers were. Soon after, he reached the place where



                     THE BANDITS DESCENDED THE BLUFF


into the brush, when they saw H. Thompson, and gave some necessary
instructions there--the Sheriff being absent with T. L Vought at J.
Doolittle's. Capt. Murphy after having a hurried consulation with. Ben
Rice, put his horse in charge of Alba Crandall, who led several other
horses, whom he posted on a slight knoll. Then he stepped to the edge of
the bluff and called for volunteers to skirmish the brush, which is in a
circular form and contains about 5 acres and is situated in the northeast
quarter section 20, township 107, range 31. This brush is willows and
plumtrees, interspersed with vines. Ben Rice and Geo. Bradford immediately
volunteered, followed by Chas. Pomeroy and James Severson. At this moment
T. L. Vought arrived, who immediately dismounted and joined. Sheriff
Glispin then came up and joined the party just as they were starting off.
The Capt. gave the men orders to keep in line at an interval of 3 or 4
paces and in case the enemies were found, to rush upon them; to examine
their guns carefully, and to shoot low. The line advanced as fast as
possible into the brush and passed through to the river, then made a wheel
to the left and passed up the river westward, with the right of the line
near enough to see the water. After advancing in this direction about ten
rods, a shot was fired from a very thick clump of willows, at a distance
of fifteen feet from the right of the line. As the shot was fired, the
robbers were seen obsecurely in a kneeling position, close together.
Glispin returned the fire on the instant with a breech-loading carbine,
and dropped to load. As four of the robbers commenced firing as fast as
possible, they being armed with Colt's, and Smith and Wesson's six
shooters, army size. Capt. Murphy opened fire at this close range with a
Colt revolver; Rice discharged his carbine, then fired his pistol; Vought
and Pomeroy fired with double-barreled shot guns, and Bradford and
Severson with carbine and rifle. Just at this time Captain Murphy received
a 44 calibre pistol shot, the ball striking a



                             BRIAR ROOT PIPE


in his vest pocket, smashing it to pieces, tearing the pocket to shreds,
and the ball lodged in the lining of his vest. The blow raised a painful
contusion on his side. Bradford also received a slight wound on the wrist,
drawing blood. The bandits then retreated a little, firing as they did so,
and being discovered by the men posted across the river on the north side,
several shots were fired from there. Most of the charges in the skirmish
line being exhausted, a slight cessation of firing took place, when the
robbers cried out to cease firing, as they were all shot to pieces, the
only one able to stand being Bob Younger, he held up his hand in token of
surrender. He was immediately ordered to advance, several guns of the
skirmishers being held on him till he was relieved of his belt and arms by
Capt. Murphy, and assured of protection from further injury. Bob had
received one wound in the breast; Cole and Jim Younger were completely
riddled--Cole having received eleven and Jim five wounds--they were laying
near together. Charley Pitts lay further to the right of the line, dead,
having received five wounds, three of which would have caused death.

The robbers had two revolvers a piece, and some of them were ivory
handled, nickle-plated, the finest ever seen in this part of the country,
and their belts full of bullets.

After their surrender they were taken in charge by Sheriff Glispin, who
had them taken to this place in a wagon, followed by the enthusiastic
crowds, composed of those engaged in the capture, and those met on the way
down, the place where they were taken being about seven miles from here.
We are told that it



                           LOOKED LIKE AN ARMY


coming as they neared town, and when cheers were raised over the victory,
the bandits swung their hats, too.

When they arrived here, they were taken to the Flanders House, and their
wounds dressed by Drs. Cooley and Overholt.

They were kept under guard at the hotel. During their stay here they were
seen by over three thousand persons, and their wounded appearance and
pretenses of contrition drew forth a manifest sympathy from some, but this
humane conduct of such has been very much exaggerated.

On Saturday morning, Sheriff Glispin, with B. Rice and Captain Murphy as
special deputies, started with the wounded bandits for Faribault, arrived
in due time and delivered the prisoners to the Sheriff of Rice Co., that
being the county in which their crime was committed. The dead robber was
taken to St. Paul, by Geo. P. Johnston and G. W, Yates, and delivered to
the State authorities for identification. Thus was the career of this band
of notorious outlaws brought to an end for the present, with only two of
the eight who came into the State escaped, and they wounded. They have
raided in thirteen States, but Minnesota proved too much for them, and it
is hoped this severe lesson will deter all others of the same stamp from
attempting to rob, especially in this State.



                           A VISIT TO MADELIA.


The first news which reached St. Paul, was "Robbers surrounded in a swamp
at Madelia, send long range rifles."

This telegram, however, did not excite so much interest as similar
messages had done before, for the people had got weaned of sensational
telegrams, but still there were about a score of men willing to go out
once more; among these was Chief King and a company of the St. Paul
Police, including Brissette. When the train reached Shakopee, however, the
news was received of the capture, when King sent back part of his men, the
others going to gratify curiosity in seeing the prisoners. The news was
expected at nearly every stopping place with the further information that
Monty's train would return from St. James and bring the men on to St.
Paul.



                               AT MANKATO,


the excitement was immense. A vast concourse of people--including hundreds
of women--had congregated at the depot and cheered the St. Paul train as it
drew up. The cars had hardly come to a standstill when a whistle was heard
and the discordant clang of a bell which foretold the approach of another
train from the west.

A general rush of the assembled throng was at once made to meet the
incoming train--Monty's--which was thought to contain the captured bandits.
Cheer after cheer rent the air and broke upon the evening's stillness as
the train slowly moved up toward the station, but when it was announced
that the prisoners were not on board,



                              DISAPPOINTMENT


took the place of exultation, and many retired with their bitter
conviction that the whole thing was a hoax. Twenty minutes for supper, but
more than three-fourths of that time had been spent by the writer in
interviewing the Mankato party, which had returned from the sanguinary
field.

From these he elicited the fact that four of the men were actually in the
hands of the Madelia people, and would be sent down in the morning.



                           ARRIVED AT MADELIA,


the writer hastened to the Flanders House, where he was informed the three
prisoners, all wounded, were in bed. Finding the courteous and obliging
landlord, he was soon allowed to pass the guard at the foot of the stairs,
and ascending, he entered a small chamber, where two men lay in one bed.
The first glance told the fact that one of the men was



                              COLE YOUNGER,


a large, powerful man, with bald head and sandy whiskers and moustache,
answering the description, given so many times of this man. He is pretty
badly wounded, and at the time was somewhat delirious, so that nothing
could be gleaned by questioning him.

His body was full of wounds, mostly caused by buckshot. His worst injuries
were about the head, several shot having penetrated the skull and embedded
themselves at the base of the brain. It was evident that some of these
leaden missiles had lodged among the nerves of the right eye, as that
organ was closed and inflamed, and appeared to be forced forward. On
entering his head, these shot had broken down the palate arch, and the
pain experienced by the prisoner must have been intense. Lying by his side
was



                               JIM YOUNGER,


who is a little shorter, and not nearly of such powerful build. He had
quite a number of wounds, the most serious of which was through his mouth,
the balls having displaced all of the teeth on one side, and broken the
roof of his mouth. His lips and cheeks were terribly swollen, and he could
articulate with the greatest difficulty, although he appeared to desire to
talk to his visitors.

In another room, about ten yards from the first, lay



                               BOB YOUNGER,


by far the finest looking man of the whole gang, and apparently the
youngest. He is six feet two inches in height, well proportioned, with
brawny arms and thick neck. His features are well-defined, well cut lips
and expressive mouth; the chin is prominent and rounded; he has a small
sandy moustache, and a beard of about two weeks' growth. But the most
remarkable feature, after the chin and mouth, is the heavy



                        PROJECTING CAPACIOUS BROW,


such as phrenologists would give to men of wonderful mathematical ability.
This man has two wounds, one an old one, or rather of some days' standing,
and supposed to be the result of Wheeler's carbine practice at Northfield,
which caused the disarticulation of the right elbow joint. His other wound
is from a ball entering the right side, just below the point of the
scapula, tracing the sixth rib and coming out near the nipple. This is a
mere flesh wound, and not at all dangerous.

At first he seemed rather reluctant to talk much, and when asked his name,
he said it was George Huddleston, to which the writer replied, "Oh, I know
who you are," when he said, with a cheering smile, "Yes, most people know
me in St. Paul. I stayed at the Merchants, and was there when the Red Caps
went to Winona to play the Clippers. I afterwards went over to Minneapolis
and stopped at the Nicollet, but on my return to St. Paul, I registered at
the European."

"But are you not a brother to the two men in the other room?" was asked.

"Yes, we are brothers; we are all brothers, sir," was the reply.

"And they say you are the Youngers. Of course, I know Cole, but I would
like to know if you are Jim or Bob?"

"I will tell you in the morning," he said. "I would rather not say
anything now. The others will tell you anything you wish to know."

But by chatting familiarly with him, many facts of interest were elicited.
He spoke of the Northfield escapade, and said it was the first of the kind
he ever was in. When asked about his wound in the right arm, if it was not
from the carbine of Wheeler, he stated that he thought it was from the
pistol of Bates--he did not see Wheeler. His arm dropped on his leg as
described, he said, which led to the belief that he was wounded in the
leg.

In speaking of the dead men at Northfield, the writer said that there was
some uncertainty whether the big man was Miller or Pitts. The prisoner
promptly said, with a smile, "It was not Miller."

He expressed himself freely as to his poor



                        OPINION OF THE DETECTIVES,


and gave an account of his party's wanderings from Mankato. He said all
six crossed the railroad bridge together. They came right through the town
on the railroad track. They knew, he said, the other bridge was guarded,
for he saw the guards; and then, hastily correcting himself, he said:

"We knew the bridge was watched, and then hastily crossed over on the
trestle bridge. We got some melons out of a garden, and on the right of
the railroad, a little further down, we got two old hens and one chicken,
the only fowls on the place, and then went on to the place where we were
disturbed when getting our breakfast ready. We had it all ready to cook
when"



                             WE HEARD THE MEN


"running and shouting up the line and as quickly as we could we got out
and crossed the State road (Garden City road.) If we had not left our
bridles, the police would not have known we had been there. I had but one
arm and I seized my blankets. If I had had two, I should have tried to
carry away some of the chicken, for we were dreadfully hungry. After
crossing the road we went southeast to the river, ran half a mile up the
stream and there laid down all day."

Asked if he did not hear shots fired, he said he did, and saw one of the
pursuers within twenty yards of him,

"At night," he continued, "we made across the railroad track again,
crossing two or three miles up towards Lake Crystal, and then took a
northerly course to the road running due west from Mankato. We then
entered the Minnesota timber, where we stayed two nights. Then we made the
first of the Linden chain of lakes, I think, and remained in that
neighborhood three nights, where we got some chickens. Up to this time we
had been"



                             LIVING ON CORN.


"We were very imprudent, this morning, in going to the house for food, but
we were so hungry."

He said the name of the bald-headed man was King, and the one lying dead
was Ward. He would tell more, he said, in the morning.

The man has a wonderfully easy manner of speaking. His voice is soft but
strong, and marvelously sympathetic and emotional.



                               THE DEAD MAN


was next interviewed. He was 5 feet 93/4 inches in height, rather slight,
with regular features, black straight hair, stubby moustache, black beard
of short growth. His hair is not dyed, and is, therefore not a James, for
they are light complexioned. Hands rather coarse and covered with black
hair. He was shot, with a heavy ball, between the second and third ribs,
and one inch to the left of the breast bone. He had also had a buckshot
wound in the right arm, five inches from the point of the shoulder and
another five inches from the right hip, striking behind.

This man has been identified as Charley Pitts, and recognized by Mr.
Bunker as the man who shot him through the arm.

The writer next found the boy who brought in the news to Madelia of the
robbers being in the neighborhood.



                           OSCAR OLESON SUBORN,


is a lad of about seventeen, who said he lives about eight and one-half
miles from Madelia, at Linden, Riverdale township. He said that at about
seven o'clock in the morning, his father was milking, when two men came
past, walking, and said "good morning" and went on. He was coming to the
house with milk pails at the time and walked up to the gate, but could not
see the faces of the men. But he could see one had a black moustache and
the other red whiskers. They went past but he said, "I knew right away"



                          THEY WERE THE ROBBERS,


and ran out to my father and said, "there goes the robbers." But his
father said they were not, and told him to go and attend to his milking.
He milked one cow and put the pail inside the gate and ran up the rode
which they had gone up. His father halloed after him to come back and to
take care of the cows, for if they were the robbers, they would shoot him.
He ran on to Mars Ouren's, and asked if he saw the two men pass by. He
said he did not see any, when the boy asked the man to go with him to see
where the men had gone, but he responded by saying he had no time. He then
started off alone, and told Christensen's folks about it, and went on the
roof of the house to look around, but could see nobody. He then hurried up
to a big hill, and still could not see anybody. When he returned, his
father told him that four men had been to get something to eat,



                         SAYING THEY WERE HUNTERS


and fishers, and asked where they could catch the best fish. The boy ran
over to Ouren's again and told them--his father objecting to his going,
saying the men would shoot him. His father hitched up the horse in the
wagon, but, seeing the boy so anxious to go, said he might take one of the
horses and go and tell the people what he had seen, if he went the east
road. He at once started for Madelia, riding at the utmost strength of the
horse, which once fell and covered him with mud.



                       "I PICKED UP MYSELF FIRST,"


"and then the horse," he said, "and was soon off again," shouting to
everybody to look out, the robbers were about. But no one would believe a
word he said. At last he came to the hotel and saw Thomas Vought, who said
they might believe him, because he always spoke the truth. He then gave up
his horse and returned in a wagon. The people left him to take care of the
horses, and they went down to the north branch of the river, by Andrew
Andersen's. He heard the shooting, but saw nothing till the men were
caught.



                          DURING THE WHOLE NIGHT


the utmost order prevailed, and no word was spoken of lynching, everybody
stating that if such a thing was attempted, they would protect the
prisoners with their lives. An inquest was held on the dead man and a
verdict found in substance that the man met with his death from the hand
of one of the citizens of Madelia while resisting arrest.



                           THE ROBBERS' LEVEE.


The next morning the Flanders House was literally crammed with eager
people, anxious to see the captive bandits, and the street in front was
thronged with an equally anxious crowd.

Cole Younger frankly acknowledged their identity, saying that he was Cole,
born the 15th of January, 1844. The man lying by his side, he said, was
his brother James, and the other, slightly wounded, Robert, their
respective ages being 28 and 22 years.



                            THEY HELD A LEVEE


in their chambers, hundreds of people passing up to see them, old men and
youths, aged ladies and young maidens, and a more singular sight is seldom
witnessed. Many believe in their contrition. Both brothers spoke in
feeling tones of their dead mother and living sister, and this touched the
women wonderfully.

Neither would say who the dead man was, excusing themselves by stating it
is a point with them never to speak of each other's affairs, only of their
own.

The writer mentioned to them that the other two,



                            THE JAMES BROTHERS


were captured, one dead and the other dying. This seemed to affect them.
Cole asked who was dead, the smaller or larger of the two, adding the
caution, "mind I don't say they are the James brothers." When the writer
said that they had acknowledged who they were, Cole then asked, "Did they
say anything of us." When answered in the negative, he replied,



                         "GOOD BOYS TO THE LAST."


A photograph of the two men killed at Northfield was shown them, and they
were told that the shorter was recognized by Kansas City people as
Chadwell, and the taller as Miller; also stating that Hazen said the
taller was Pitts.

Cole said "they were good likenesses, and cannot but be recognized, but
both detectives were wrong." He then added, "Don't misunderstand me; I did
not say neither of them was Miller, but there is no Pitts there".

No excitement was feared at Madelia. In fact, there was too much sympathy
shown, and every kindness was bestowed upon the captive bandits. Caution
was, however, taken to prevent their escape,



                             ARMED SENTINELS


being placed at the foot of the stairs and about the house.

Friday, in this brave, plucky, generous little town of Madelia, was a day
which will long be remembered, not only by the staunch hearts and true of
the town, but also by hundreds upon hundreds of visitors, who then for the
first time trod its streets, attracted there by the widespread news which
suddenly raised the obscure name to a high position upon the roll of fame.

The self-sacrificing heroism of six men made the fame of Colais in the
olden time, and the plucky



                           COURAGE OF SEVEN MEN


has wrung from grudging fortune the renown of Madelia to-day; for
throughout the length and breadth of the land, and wherever the pulsations
of the electric message-bearer--the nervous system of civilization--was
felt, the bosom of generous sentiment swelled with approbation, gratitude,
and pride, when the tale of the cool dash and unselfish bravery of those
seven Madelians was told. The united voices and hearts of the whole nation
swell with gratitude and laudations for Madelia's sturdy heroism.

All day Friday and all the night previous, there was a constant and
ever-changing stream of visitors passing through the rooms occupied by
Madelia's fated captives. One could but speculate with wonder upon the
source of such an inexhuastible human stream.

Not an inconsiderable moiety of the great total of visitors was of the
gentler sex, and to one watching with interest the great bandits' matinee
and evening receptions, the changing expressions upon the eager, expectant
and occasionally indignant countenances of visitors, was of singular
interest. A strong, energetic man would enter with knitted brow, and
stern, unrelenting features, who would be followed by a timid,
half-fearful, half-loathing woman's face. Then there were angry faces,
curious faces, bold, proud faces--faces exhibiting every phase of human
passion and human temperament--but they had scarcely passed the threshhold
of either prison chamber wherein lay the objects of all-absorbing
curiosity, when lo! presto! a metamorphose as sudden as it was complete,
and as radical as it was rapid, had taken place. Doubt, wonder, and
astonishment would grow into



                                SYMPATHY,


and often admiration. It is safe to say that out of every hundred visitors
who looked only for a few seconds upon those daring and notorious men,
ninety-nine came away with very different, almost opposite opinions
concerning the lawless Younger brothers.

Was it really true that anger, malice, revenge, cruelty, hard, unyielding,
implacable hatred ever marred such countenances!--that cold, murderous,
steel-like scintillations ever beamed from those eyes? Was it possible
that blasphemous execrations and hellish denunciations ever polluted such
voices and blistered those pleasant tongues? Was it really true that those
three intelligent men--courteous and affable--had plotted and executed some
of the most cold-blooded, atrocious diabolisms ever known in modern times?
Questions, perhaps, like these, were asked of themselves by hundreds of
visitors yesterday, and left unanswered satisfactorily.



                               COLE YOUNGER


was more demonstrative than either of the rest. He always respected
religion, he told one lady. His mother, he said, was a good, praying,
Christian woman, and two of his uncles were Methodist ministers.

To another who urged him to pray for himself, for although "the prayers of
the righteous availeth much," salvation must necessarily depend upon
himself, he said: "I conceive prayer to exist in every action, every
thought, and considering the eventful life I have led, I cannot say I have
been a praying man. A splendid theme for earnest sermons," he continued,
"is that divine mandate, 'Remember thy Creator in the days of thy
youth.' "

To another lady he said: "It is not my raising, but from the"



                         FORCE OF CIRCUMSTANCES,


"I am what I am. Accused of all manner of crimes before I had committed
one, I am like the Wandering Jew."

In expressing his gratitude for the kindness manifested by the ladies and
the people generally, he said: "It takes a brave man to fight a battle,
but a braver man to treat well a fallen foe."

Every lady that entered his room he greeted courteously, and as she was
leaving, he would ask her to pray for him and his brother--when James would
chime in, "Not for us, never mind us, but pray for our dear sister."

To a group of ladies who shrinkingly looked upon the two wounded men, Cole
said: "Ladies, this is a terrible sight." When one asked him in trembling,
gentle tones, "Do your wounds pain you?" his reply was, "Wounds do not
trouble me, madam; I would as leave die as be a prisoner."



                        WHEN ASKED ABOUT HEYWOOD,


he said that ninety-nine out of a hundred would have opened the safe. "At
least," he added, "I know I would."

Asked why Heywood was shot, he said, "he supposed the man who shot him,
whoever he might be, thought Heywood was going to shoot him. The fact that
the man was on the counter and turned round, as the papers say, and shot
him, is sufficient proof of this. Heywood went to his desk and the man
thought chat he was about to take a pistol out of the desk." "That was an
unfortunate affair," he continued, "and the man who did it, no doubt
regretted it immediately."



                               BOB YOUNGER,


the youngest brother, is not disposed to talk cant, but answers questions
frankly and promptly when directed to his own affairs, but he will not
answer a word about any other member of the gang. When asked if he did not
think Heywood a brave fellow, he remarked that he thought he acted from
fear throughout. He was too much frightened to open the safe, or he could
not do it. He (Bob) was was of the opinion that Heywood could not open the
safe, and he did not wish to go any further with that job. When asked



                          WHY HEYWOOD WAS SHOT,


he said it was not on account of revenge, but simply in self-defense, "for
what object could there be in such a cold-blooded crime, when the party
must be the sufferers. It was a very unfortunate affair for us," he said.

Bob did not hesitate to answer any question proposed to him which
concerned himself. He volunteered the statement that he was one of the
three who entered the bank, and it was he who tried to keep Manning from
firing up the street. Being asked if he was not considered a good shot, he
said he had always considered himseif a good marksman, but he thought that
he would now have to forego all claim to being a crack-shot, after
considering the unusually bad shooting he made in the bush when captured.

To the boy who put the Mankato men upon the track, Cole extended his hand,
and said:



                            "READ YOUR BIBLE,"


"my lad, and follow its precepts. Do not let them lead you astray. For
your part in our capture I freely forgive you."

Every opportunity he could get when ladies were present, he would ask them
to pray for him, and he would incessantly talk on religious subjects and
his previous history, laying the blame of his position to the "force of
circumstances," tracing the beginning of his trouble to the "murder of his
father by a band of militia thieves."

He said that many of the great crimes for which he and his companions were
blamed, he had nothing at all to do with.

There were not a few of the visitors who were of the opinion that Cole
Younger was



                                FOXING IT,


and that he was trying to play off the "pious dodge," awakening
commisseration and sympathy from the tender-hearted and religious. The
asperity and bitter irony shown when a lady less sympathizing and more
matter of-fact than most of his visitors spoke severely of his disgraceful
position and degraded life led many to think that Cole is a consumate
actor and an arch hypocrite.

When asked why they went to the Northfield bank, and whether it was not
more risky than even Mankato banks, he said he told the others at the
first that it was



                         A DANGEROUS UNDERTAKING,


and if they had taken his advice, they would not have gone out to
Northfield. There was no means of getting away, for the roads were bad and
the woods filled with lakes and sloughs. It would have been better for the
band to have gone across the prairie from Mankato, for then they would
have had some $30 each.

He was asked if he had tried to shoot any one, when he pointed out the
fact that seven of the men were almost within hand's-reach of them, and
asked what good would it have done him if all the seven were killed. There
were men enough at long range with rifles to shoot him and his party down
at their leisure.

While Bob Younger was conversing with the writer, a poor woman came into
the room, sobbing, "Don't you know me?" she said, addressing Bob.

"No, madame, I have not that pleasure," said Bob.

"Don't you know me?" reiterated the woman between her sobs.

"Indeed, I cannot recollect you, madame," replied Bob, gently.

"Don't you remember the woman who gave you bread and butter?" she asked.

"Oh yes, certainly; and most thankful were we for it," he replied.

"Oh, forgive me, sir," she sobbed, "indeed, I did not intend to do it."

"I have nothing to forgive," said Bob; "you were very kind to us and we
shall not forget it."

"But forgive me, sir," she persisted, "I did not mean to betray you."

"Why, really, madam, we never supposed you did. We did not blame you at
all. We are only very grateful for what you did for us."

"But, sir. it was because you were at our house you were caught; but it"



                            WAS NOT MY FAULT,


"indeed it was not."

Bob, concerned, "I hope you won't trouble about it, madam. It is nothing.
We cast the die and lost, and do not blame you in the least. We are only
very thankful for what you did."

"But forgive me," persisted the poor woman, "I am so sorry," and she began
again to shed tears.

"I have nothing to forgive, only to be grateful for," said Bub, "but if it
will make you feel better, I will say I forgive you,"

The poor woman seemed to be greatly relieved and left the room, when Bob
turned round to the writer with a concerned and troubled look, and asked
the woman's name.

"Mrs. Suborn, the mother of the lad who informed the people of your
whereabouts," was the reply.

"I shall never forget that name," said Bob.

The cashier of the First National Bank of Mankato coming in asked Bob if
he did not change a bill at his bank. Bob replied promptly that he did--a
$50 bill, "But" said he, "you were not in the bank at the time, we were,
however, merely giving you a call, only a little matter prevented it, and
we unfortunately went to Northfield instead." The cashier asked what their
intentions were in Mankato. To which Bob replied that they intended to go
through both banks--the City and First National, and he thought that it
would have been a much safer job than the Northfield. No doubt the "little
circumstance" he alluded to as destroying their plans was the fact of
Jesse James being recognized by Robinson, as related elsewhere.

Friday evening at supper time, when the dining hall of the hotel was
crowded, at one of the table, there were dark whispers and ominous



                           THREATS OF LYNCHING,


and some talk, of several hundred people coming up from St. Paul and
Northfield to carry out the disgraceful threat. This was sufficient to
rouse the precautionary energy of Sheriff Glispin, who at once appointed
an armed guard, which filled the entire hotel. The guard and the populace
generally were determined to protect their prisoners to the bitter end, if
the worst came to the worst, and at half past eight o'clock the hotel was
cleared, but on the arrival of the 9 p. m. train, it was found that the
rowdies had either missed the train, or had abandoned the scheme, or the
whole thing, (which was most probable) was a hoax.

The talk at the supper table arose from a man recently from Mankato,
asserting that the scoundrels should be lynched, offering to bet $500 that
they would be strung up before morning. It was said that the man was
intoxicated, but that was no palliation of his brutish threat.



                       DISPOSITION OF THE CAPTIVES.


As soon as the news of the capture was received at St. Paul, Captain Macy,
secretary to the Governor, telegraphed the executive, then at the
Centennial, the fact. The Governor promptly responded, directing Capt.
Macy to order the Madelia authorities to bring their prisoners, with the
body of the dead bandit to this city. Capt. Macy spent about two hours in
telegraphing with the sheriff of the county, who at first strongly opposed
the removal, partly on the ground the wounded men were not in a condition
to be moved, but principally from a fear that had somehow taken possession
of the minds of those taking part in the capture, that their removal to
St. Paul would invalidate their claim for the reward offered for their
arrest. To this latter objection Capt. Macy answered that the Governor
would be responsible for the preservation of all their rights, upon which
the Sheriff telegraphed they would be sent down by the morning train, on a
sleeper tendered for that purpose, by Supt. Lincoln. Later, however, the
sheriff, in consultation with citizens, changed his mind, and determined
to send his prisoners on to Faribault, the county seat of Rice county.
Accordingly they were placed in the cars at Madelia on Saturday morning,
and at every station en route a curious and eager mob awaited the arrival
of the train, anxious to get a glimpse of the notorious freebooters. At
Mankato, half the city turned out, and arrangements were made at the depot
for the crowd to pass through and feast their eyes upon the big show.

At Faribault the crowd was comparatively small, owing, perhaps, to the
fact that they were unexpectedly brought on by a freight train, but when
it got generally noised about that the infamous desperadoes were lodged in
the jail, people of all classes and both sexes thronged the building
anxious to gain admittance.



                               AT ST. PAUL,


Capt. Macy received a telegram from Sheriff Barton, of Rice county, as
follows: "I start for Madelia in half an hour. Will bring them by St.
Paul."

Saturday morning thereafter, about eleven o'clock crowds began to gather
along the bluffs and on the bridge and in any position in which a view of
the Sioux City train (on which it was supposed the robbers were being
brought to the city) could be obtained. The train was seen crossing the
river and immediately the crowd commenced swarming like a hive of bees. As
the train approached, and when it came in front of the open space above
the upper elevator, the rear platform of the cars appeared to be crowded
with people, one man waving a roll of white paper. Then the excitement
seemed to culminate. Crowds rushed down the streets in danger of being
crushed under the wheels of buggies, wagons and vehicles of all
descriptions, which dashed down the streets at a rate which set all
ordinances at defiance, and scattered the mud around in a promiscuous
manner. At reaching the levee a crowd of fully three thousand people in a
terrible state of excitement, were assembled, some climbing up on the
still moving train in spite of all efforts of the officers to prevent
them, while others ran ahead of the engine and alongside. It soon became
evident, however, that the prisoners were not aboard, and a rumor got
afloat that they had been taken off the train at Chestnut street and
brought to the county jail from thence.

Then there was a scattering among the crowd, and a race was made for the
jail, where the moving mass was equally disappointed. Here a large number
of persons had already congregated and secured seats around the several
entrances of the portico of the Court House, and everywhere where there
was a chance of seeing anything.

Here they waited patiently for a while, when some one started a story that
the prisoners would be brought through the Fifth street entrance, and a
run was made up Cedar street for that point. On arriving there they were
assured that no prisoners had been brought into the jail through that
entrance, and the idea began to creep through their brains that they had
been badly sold. Some, however, could not be persuaded but that they would
be smuggled into the building, when the crowd had dispersed, and after
waiting for a considerable time longer, reluctantly coming to the
conclusion that there was no chance for them to satisfy their curiosity
with a sight of the desperadoes, slowly and reluctantly left the ground,
and the square surrounding the jail was soon abandoned to its usual and
casual passers by and occupants of the several offices.

The dead man, Charley Pitts, was brought on to St. Paul and placed under
the care of Dr. Murphy, Surgeon General of the State, for embalming. He
was exhibited to an admiring throng of St. Paulites, who being
disappointed in not having the big show of real live bandits, were obliged
to content themselves with the dead one.



                           MR. JAMES MCDONOUGH,


chief of police at St. Louis; a member of the police force of that city;
and Mr. C. B. Hunn, superintendent of the U. S. express company, arrived
in St. Paul on Saturday morning. These gentlemen came for the purpose of
establishing the identity of the robbers. They were satisfied those killed
at Northfield, were Bill Chadwell and Clell Miller, immediately
recognizing their photographs.

Chief McDonough is a straight, fleshy gentleman, with a military bearing,
a keen eye, and the appearance of a man possessed of the executive ability
requisite to control and conduct so great a force of men, (over five
hundred,) as compose the splendid police force of the city of St. Louis.
He had obtained from Hobbs Kerry, one of the gang engaged in the bold raid
on the train at Otterville, Mo., July 7th, detailed descriptions of the
other members of the gang, and early yesterday morning he visited the
capitol to view the body lying there. As soon as he looked upon it he
recognized it as Charley Pitts, whose real name is George Wells. Every
mark was found as detailed by the captured robber, and the chief was
evidently pleased to find that he had succeeded in getting so much truth
out of one of the members of a gang whose honor is pledged not to "peach"
on their comrades. One of the most noticeable peculiarities of Pitts, who
is a man of most powerful build, is his extremely short, thick feet. They
require but number six boots, and look inadequate to support the ponderous
form above. His hands, which are also small and fat, were roughened by
work, and covered with black hair, exactly as Kerry had said. From Mr.
McDonough, it was learned that Pitts is one of the men who are summoned
when "dirty work" is on hand. His home is in Texas, and he is known as one
of the boldest and most successful horse thieves in the country. His
knowledge of horses is so great, that the care of the stock of the gang is
always confided to him.



                      DETECTIVES' TRIP TO FARIBAULT.


Having decided the identity of Pitts, the officers returned to the
Merchants' Hotel, and it was arranged that a special train should be
procured to transport them, in company with several officials of this
city, and a few well known citizens, to Faribault to interview his



                            BROTHERS IN CRIME.


The train was ready at about 1:30, Superintendent Lincoln having, at very
short notice, provided an engine and an elegant passenger coach. Among the
few that took passage in the train, were Chief McDonough, Mr. Russell, and
Superintendent Hunn, of the United States Express Company, all of St.
Louis; Mayor Maxfield, Chief King, Captain Webber, Captain Macs, Dr.
Murphy, Col. John L. Merriam and his sons, W, R. Merriam, cashier of the
Merchant's National Bank, and master John L., Jr., who was with his father
at the time of the Gad's Hill robbery three years ago; Superintendent
Lincoln (who was also a victim of the same raid), Col. Hewitt, R. C.
Munger, H. H. Spencer, of West Wisconsin railroad; Mayor Ames, of
Northfield, and



                        A LARGE NUMBER OF LADIES,


who desired to look upon the desperate fellows, but who evinced no more
curiosity than their male comrades.

The run to Faribault was accomplished at about 4 o'clock. During the ride
a most open discussion of the situation of the affair took place, and
there was no concealment of the disappointment felt of any of the bandits
being taken alive, and the desire was freely expressed that the three



                              BLOODY BANDITS


should not be permitted to take advantage of the clemency which the laws
of Minnesota afford to a self-convicted murderer.

The news that a special train was _en route_ had been kept so quiet, that
on arriving at Faribault, no persons were at the depot except the officers
of the road and Mr. Case, with several omnibuses. It had been arranged
that only a select few should visit the jail with the detectives, and but
eight persons, including the writer were admitted, the remainder of the
party separating and seeking a lunch before they interviewed the outlaws.

During the entire day there had been a constant stream of visitors from
the adjacent country, who came in all sorts of conveyances, the citizens
of Faribault giving way to them and awaiting a quieter time to call on
their distinguished guests.

The jail was surrounded by men and women when the chosen delegation
arrived, but by an arrangement with Sheriff Barton, the crowd was
restrained, and the St. Louis gentlemen, Mayor Maxfield, Chief King,
Captain Macy, Dr. Murphy, Messrs. Lincoln and Merriam, and representatives
of the St. Paul dailies were admitted.

On entering, Bob Younger was found sitting near the corner of the cage,
quietly smoking a cigar with a newspaper on his lap. Cole was lying on a
pallet at the end of the twenty foot jail outside the cage, with a cigar
in his mouth and a daily paper before him. The lazy bandit was being
fanned by a boy, and seemed wonderfully comfortable. The third man was
lying on a cot just inside the bars, and was evidently suffering severely
from the wound in his mouth.

Cole Younger was found communicative as usual. Chief King, showed him
pictures of the two James boys, taken eight years since, and he
immediately knew them, but said nobody would recognize them from those
pictures now. On looking at his own picture he acknowledged it as one of
the best he ever had taken, but when he looked at that of Charley Pitts,
he said he knew no man of that name. Chief King said: "But you know this
man as Wells," when Cole responded, "There are Wellses in every part of
the country."

At this time Mr. Ames, of Faribault, came up and asked what part he took
in the affair at Northfield. He declined to tell. Mr. A. then said he
thought he rode a white faced horse, and was the man that shot the Swede.
Cole denied this. Ames said that man was observed as the best horseman of
the crowd. Younger then said one man was as good a rider as another. He
was raised on a saddle, his father having been a herder and stock man, and
besides, he had served several years in the cavalry. The gentlemen then
spoke of the killing of Heywood as a cowardly act. Cole said it was the
result of impulse, as they did not intend to kill anybody. Their plan was
to accomplish their ends by dash, and boldness, and to do the robbing
while men were frightened. This was denied by the Northfield man, who
claimed that they tried hard to kill Manning. Cole then said that they did
not try to kill him, using his name as if he knew all about it, but fired
all around him. Mr. Ames said that could not be true, as shots were found
in the railing of the stairs behind which Manning stood. Younger denied
this, and said they desired to kill no man, as it would be of no use to
them. Ames then said he believed they had killed a hundred men, when Cole
said he had no time to talk with such a man, he had been captured by brave
men, and was being treated better than he deserved, that he did not fear
death, but hoped to be prepared for a better world. He said he was tired
and needed rest. At this, an impulsive gentleman standing by said he
wished he would soon take his long rest. Cole seemed offended at this, and
said it was "of no" use to talk to illiterate people, they could not



                       "APPRECIATE A SUBLIME LIFE!"


Cole said he did not ride his fine horse up here, but bought the one he
rode of French, of St. Peter. When told by a visitor that they did bad
shooting, he said if they would prop him up at the side of the road he
would plug his hat with his left hand at ten rods every time. He said he
was the man that took the pistols from the dead man at Northfield; and
said he took his handkerchief out of his belt as he took it off. He
declined to tell the name of the dead man, as it was understood none
should tell about another dead or alive.

Col Merriam sat by the side of Cole, and said, "Younger, I am not certain,
but I think I have seen you before." "Where was this?" said Cole. The
Colonel said it was at Gad's Hill three years ago when the raid was made
on the train. This, Cole denied, and said that at that time he was in St.
Clair county, in Southwestern Missouri, where his uncle, Judge Younger
resides. He said he would refer to his uncle, who is a judge, and was a
member of the legislature, and also to a minister there. He further said
that on the day of that raid he and his brother Robert were there, and
that he preached in the afternoon, commencing at four o'clock.

Col. Merriam feels sure that Cole was there, judging from his figure, his
hair, and particularly by his voice. Mr. Lincoln is also certain that he
was one of the men on the train at that time, although he wore a cloth
with eye holes over his face. Master Merriam, who was also on the train,
is not certain, but thinks he has seen the villain.

Bob Younger was asked if he was in the Gad's hill raid, but denied it,
saying he was in Louisiana at that time, thus contradicting Cole. Bob says
he is a novice, and has only been in a few scrapes.

While some of the visitors were talking with the boys, Mr. McDonough, his
aid, and Dr. Murphy, were examining the prisoners for marks of
identification, and no trouble was experienced in placing Cole and Bob
Younger, but the identity of the one that claimed to be Jim, was doubted
by the detectives, as James was badly wounded in the hip on the 7th of
July last, and they thought he could not possibly be able to stand a
campaign like this at present. They were of the opinion that he was Cal.
Carter, a Texas desperado, and one that has seldom worked with a gang
until lately.

Every point of identification as given by Hobbs Kerry, was discovered on
the Younger boys, even to the ragged wound on Bob's hand, where the thumb
had been torn off and badly attended to.

Dr. Murphy said none were dangerously injured, and "are sure to get well
unless he doctors them." He made a careful examination and said they had
only flesh wounds, and that the men could be about in a few days. None of
the prisoners were shackled, and as the writer came out (he being the last
one of the visitors), Cole Younger got up from his bed and walked across
the jail as lively as he.

When the robbers were captured their clothes and boots were found in a bad
state. The three living robbers had each five dollars in their pockets,
and the dead one had one dollar and a half. According to the statement of
Bob Younger, all of the money, watches and jewelry they had was given to
the two robbers that escaped, as they felt that their chances of getting
away were much the best.



                         IMPRISONMENT AND TRIAL.


Great fears were entertained that the Rice county jail at Faribault, would
not be of sufficient strength to hold the three famous bandit brothers, of
whose great desperation and accomplishment in the art of prison breaking,
the most wonderful and exaggerated stories were circulated throughout the
State. Sheriff Ara Barton, however, did not hesitate to accept his
distinguished boarders, and probably a thought of their escape from him
never entered his mind. He had the bandits in his care, and he proceeded
in the most systematic manner to provide for their remaining with him. No
effort was made to strengthen the jail, but a series of guards was
arranged so that the inside and outside were both constantly under the eye
of watchful guards. The only fears entertained by those having the robbers
in charge, were that there might be efforts made from the outside, either
by a mob who would seek to lynch the brigands, or by their own friends,
who would undertake to liberate them. For both cases, Sheriff Barton was
prepared.



                         A COMPANY OF MINUTE MEN


was formed by citizens of the city, and the bell of an adjacent engine
house was connected with the guard room of the jail by a wire. In case of
any attack, these fifty men, armed with repeating rifles, were to
rendezvous at a certain point from whence, under their captain, they would
proceed in order to the jail. Another wise precaution taken by the Sheriff
was in the locking of the doors of the jail, which are about 18 inches
apart. He kept the key of the inner one himself, while the guard inside
retained that of the outside door. At a private signal, the guard would
reach through and unlock the outer one, when the Sheriff would find use
for his key on the inner one. Several guards kept constant watch night and
day around the jail, and at its entrance, a cannon loaded with a blank
cartridge stood, ready to give a general alarm. As an instance of how
perfect the arrangements were, it may be stated that on one occasion when
the fire bell sounded, in less than three minutes the jail was surrounded
by men, some carrying guns, some bludgeons, and some farm tools. Any party
foolish enough to have undertaken the rescue of those



                              THREE BANDITS,


would have been made short work of, while a mob, with the intention of
disposing of them unlawfully, would have been met with a determined
opposition, for the entire male population of Faribault were determined to
support the Sheriff, and bring the murderers to trial.

Notice of the arrangements about the prison were published, and all people
were warned from approaching the jail in the night time, but one man,
belonging to the police force of the city, thought he was so well known to
the guards that he could safely visit them, and one evening he walked
toward the prison. One of the guards challenged him, but instead of
replying, he raised his hand to his coat, to make his silver star visible,
and at the same moment, the guard mistaking the movement and supposing
that the man was reaching to his breast pocket for a pistol, fired,
inflicting a wound that proved fatal soon afterwards. Thus was another
tragedy added to the list, and the horror of the affair was intensified.

Thus for a month everything moved quietly along about Governor Barton's
hotel, and he remained unmoved by the hundreds of threats and propositions
he received. He is a brave man made of stern stuff, and when a proposition
was made to him to remain neutral while a posse that was being organized,
opened the jail and took the bandits out to



                            THE NEAREST TREE,


he coolly told their messenger, who was a prominent man in the State, and
a personal friend of his, "that if they came, no matter who they were,
they would be shot down like dogs." This remark was repeated to the party
who proposed the lynching, by Mayor Nutting, and people began to think it
was best to abandon the project of anticipating the law, while the Younger
boys remained in such hands. However, there is no doubt but that a summary
disposal of these bloody cut-throats would have been widely endorsed by
the best men of the State, as the feeling existed that no villians ever
merited death more than they, while under the law of Minnesota, they could
escape with a life sentence, with the possibilities of escape or pardon.



                             INSIDE THE JAIL.


Under the best of medical care the Younger boys rapidly recovered from
their wounds, and in less than two weeks, Cole and Jim were up and about,
looking as well as ever, except that Cole had suffered a partial paralysis
of the right eye, which had a wild, rolling look, and which was forced
forward to an unpleasant prominence, caused by the buckshot that still
remained in his head, and which he refused to allow the Doctors to remove,
as he said they did not incommode him.

Jim's wounds on the outside of his face healed finely, and he proved to be
a mild, pleasant and inoffensive fellow, appearing entirely incapable of
such bloody work as that in which he had taken part, and strengthening the
belief in the story that he had been prevailed upon contrary to his
inclination. All of his back teeth had been carried away by the shot, and
the roof of his mouth shattered, causing him much inconvenience in talking
and eating, but his appetite was good, and he managed to do full justice
to the liberal rations his hospitable host provided.

Bob enjoyed perfect general health, but the wound through the elbow of his
right arm promised to incapacitate him, as it was rigidly stiff. The
surgeons decided on a severe operation, and Bob carelessly submitted while
the joint was broken and re-set. Then a hinge-like holder was placed
around the wounded limb, and by slightly moving the joint each day, the
arm was saved, and he is now able to make himself useful at light work in
the State prison.

The bandits occupied the jail with a number of other prisoners, and were
kept inside a series of strong iron bars that divided the cells from the
corridor. Manacles were kept upon their legs, and the eye of a guard was
never off them. They occupied their time in reading and writing, and Cole
devoted himself almost constantly to reading the Bible, taking occasional
instruction from the revised statutes of the State, relating the
punishment of murderers. All were humble and patient, except that the
independent Bob, when the subject of hanging was under discussion, would
boldly claim that "they could not hang him for what he never did."



                                IN COURT.


On the 7th day of November, the district court of Rice county convened in
Faribault. Judge Sam'l Lord presiding. The first duty of the sheriff, was
to present the names of twenty-two grand jurors, which he did on the 8th
inst.

The Younger brothers had engaged Mr. Thomas Rutledge, of Madelia, as their
counsel, and had subsequently associated with him, Messrs. Batchelder and
Buckham, of Faribault, two of the most eminent lawyers of the State. The
prosecution was in the hands of George N. Baxter, Esq., the county
attorney of Rice county, and he had woven a strong chain of evidence about
the prisoners, having traced them and their comrades through all their
journeying from the time they entered the State until the raid was made.

The prisoners' counsel had long interviews with their clients, and it was
generally understood that, in case they were indicted for murder in the
first degree, they would plead "not guilty." This was taking a risk, as in
case they were found guilty, the death penalty could be inflicted at the
option of the jury, and it would have been difficult to find a jury but
that would have quickly pronounced a doom so much in accordance with
public sentiment.

The county attorney, Mr. Baxter, drew and presented four indictments for
the consideration of the grand jury, one charging them collectively with
being accessory to the murder of Heywood, a second, charging them with
attacking Bunker with intent to do great bodily injury; a third, charging
them with robbing the bank at Northfield; and a fourth, charging Cole with
the murder of the Swede, and his brothers as accessories.

When Cole Younger read the last named indictment, he appeared greatly
affected, and said that he had not expected such a bill, as he did not
kill the Swede. He said it had probably been done by accident, as none of
them shot to kill. From the time the indictments were read by Cole, he
became low-spirited, and studied the statutes and consulted with his
lawyers more than before. Bob kept up, and declared that he would not
plead guilty in any case.



                              THE GRAND JURY


that had been summoned included twenty two of the best men in the county,
but the prisoner's counsel reduced it to seventeen, by challenging a
number who had too freely expressed their ideas in regard to the affair.
There is no doubt but that by continuing the same line of questioning the
grand jury could have all been found wanting, but it was not the intention
of the defense to delay the trial by reducing the number below the legal
minimum, but simply to refer the bills to as few men as possible, feeling
that the chance of their finding all of the indictments could be
materially lessened.

It took the jury but a very short time after they commenced their work to
find four true bills against the prisoners, and the evidence given by the
witnesses that testified before them, was but a recapitulation of what
they were entirely familiar with. In the case of the Swede, whom Cole
Younger was charged with killing, evidence was given by a man and a woman,
both of whom testified that they saw Cole shoot him coolly and
deliberately.



                            IN THE COURT ROOM.


On the day after the court convened, the sister and an aunt of the Younger
boys arrived in Faribault. The sister, Miss Henrietta Younger, is a very
pretty, prepossessing young lady of about seventeen years, and she
conducted herself so as to win the esteem of all who met her. Mrs. Fanny
Twyman, their aunt, is the wife of a highly respectable physician
practicing in Missouri, and appears to be a lady of the highest moral
character. These ladies passed the greater portion of their time sitting
with their relatives, behind the iron bars, reading, talking and sewing.
On Thursday, the 9th of November, the grand jury signified that they had
completed their labors as far as the cases of the Younger boys were
concerned, and the sheriff was instructed to bring the prisoners to hear
the indictments read.

This summons had been expected, and the boys were ready, dressed neatly,
and looking wonderfully well after their unaccustomed confinement that had
continued for more than a month. They quietly stood up in a row ready to
be shackled together. Cole in the middle, Bob at the right, and Jim at the
left. The shackles were placed on their feet; Bob being secured by one
foot to Cole, and Jim by the other. When the handcuffs were placed on
Cole, he remarked, that it was the first time he had ever worn them. The
prisoners showed signs of nervousness, evidently fearing that the crowd
outside would think it best to dispose of them without due process of law.
However, nothing occurred except some almost inaudible mutterings among
the spectators, but which were quickly quieted by right-minded citizens.
Slowly the procession passed to the temple of justice, the prisoners
seeing the sun and breathing the pure air for the first time in thirty
days. In advance of them was an armed guard, led by the captain of the
minute men, then came the sheriff by the side of his prisoners, the chief
of police of Faribault, and his lieutenant, and finally another squad of
minute men with their needle guns. On reaching the court-house, the guards
broke to the right and left, and allowed none to enter except those known
to their captain.

The cortege passed to the court room by a rear stairway, and when the
prisoners arrived in front of the Judge, the court-room was thoroughly
filled with people, all gazing with the greatest curiosity on the three



                             BLOODY BROTHERS.


The shackles having been removed from the arms and legs of the prisoners,
they were ordered to stand up while the indictment charging them with
killing Heywood, was read to them by the county attorney. As their names
were read, the Judge asked them if they were indicted by their true names,
to which all responded in the affirmative. During the reading, Cole
Younger never moved his sharp eye from the face of the attorney, in fact,
his gaze was so intense, that Mr. Baxter appeared to feel it, and to be
made somewhat nervous thereby. Bob did not appear to take great interest
in the matter, and he gazed coolly about on the crowd.

The sister and aunt of the boys were by their sides during this scene, and
they walked with them as they returned to the jail under the same guard
that escorted them forth. Until the following Saturday had been taken by
the prisoners' counsel to plead to the indictment, and during the interval
of three days the subject of how to plead was discussed for many hours.
Bob was as independent as ever, declared he would not plead guilty, but
the persuasions of sister and aunt finally prevailed, and when taken into
court on Saturday in the same manner as before, each responded



                                "GUILTY,"


when the question was asked by the clerk. Judge Lord then, without preface
or remark, sentenced each to be confined in the State Prison, at
Stillwater, at hard labor, for the term of his natural Life. After the
dread words had been uttered, the sister broke down and fell sobbing and
moaning on the breast of her brother Cole.

Thus these bloody bandits escaped the gallows where their many crimes
should have been expiated, and in a few days from the time they were
sentenced, they were on their way to Stillwater, under a strong guard, but
no attempt was made to molest them, although large crowds were collected
at each station on the railroads by which they traveled. Sheriff Barton
knew well the citizens of his State, and he had no fear that he would be
interfered with while discharging his duty. The bandits were accompanied
to their final home in this world by their faithful relatives, who left
them within the prison walls, taking away as mementoes the clothes which
the wicked men had worn. The robbers were immediately set at work painting
pails, a labor which called for no dangerous tools to prosecute, and a
special guard was set upon the renowned villains, as it is not intended
that they shall escape to again terrify the world by their wicked deeds.

                          [JOSEPH LEE HEYWOOD.]

                           JOSEPH LEE HEYWOOD.





BIOGRAPHICAL.




                           JOSEPH LEE HEYWOOD,


the brave victim of the desperate raid, was born at Fitzwilliam, N. H.,
August 12th, 1837. He left home when about twenty years of age, and passed
the better part of a year in Concord, Mass., and then changed his
residence to Fitchburg, remaining there not far from a year. At the age of
twenty-three, or in 1860, he came as far west as New Baltimore, Mich., and
for some twelve months was occupied as clerk and book-keeper in a drug
store. Moline, Illinois, then became his home for a short time, but the
war of the rebellion raging, he went to Chicago and enlisted for three
years in the 127th Illinois regiment. This was in 1862. Soon after he was
ordered to the front and saw not a little of hard service on the march,
and on the field of battle. He was present at the unsuccessful attack on
Vicksburg, and also at the capture of Arkansas Post.  Not long after, his
health giving way through exposure and over exertion, he was sent first to
the hospital, and then sent, more dead than alive, to his friends in
Illinois.  A few months later, recovering his health sufficiently to do
light service, he was detailed as druggist in a dispensary at Nashville,
where he remained until the close of the war, and was discharged in May,
1865. The next year was spent, for the most part, with friends in
Illinois, and then we find him, in the summer of 1866, in Minnesota, and
in Faribault, and the year after in Minneapolis, in a drug store again. In
the fall of 1867, he removed to Northfield to keep books in the lumber
yard, for S. P. Stewart. Four years since he accepted the position in the
bank which he held till all earthly occupations came to a sudden and
untimely end.

He was a man whose integrity and honor were never impeached, a good
citizen and neighbor, a friend to be sought, and a loving and loved
husband and father.





                               THE CAPTORS.


The following sketches of the intrepid captors who risked their lives in
the bush to attack the desperate outlaws, was supplied by W. H. H.
Johnston, Esq. for the _Pioneer-Press,_ from which it is copied:




                          SHERIFF JAMES GLISPIN


is an American, of Irish parentage, having a mother, sisters and brothers
residing in Watonwan county. He is probably twenty-five or twenty-eight
years of age, five feet six inches in height, rather light built, fair
complexion, short dark brown hair, and, although in somewhat poor health
last year, is one of the quickest and most wiry young men in the county.
Possessing not only great physical strength and endurance, whereby I have
seen him completely overcome, in several serious disturbances, larger men,
boasting of their power and daring, but he has great magnetic and
persuasive influence, and I have seen peace restored by his exceedingly
quiet presence and determined glance, whereas only a few moments
previously it looked threatening and dangerous. No tenderer or
kinder-hearted man exists, unless duty compels otherwise. I know in doing
business with him as an attorney and the evidence of the other lawyers
will be the same, that in every respect he is honorable, fair, and
impartial in the discharge of his duty, as well as a perfect gentleman. I
always considered him a remarkable young man, all wire and grit. Four
winters ago he was in Hon. B. Yates' store as a polite and obliging clerk.
The next winter he went to work in a woolen mill at Minneapolis. He was in
poor health; came to his home and was nominated on the Democratic ticket
as a liberal, against the ex-sheriff, one of the most popular Republicans
in the county, and Glispin carried by several hundred in a Republican
stronghold. He served faithfully and well two years, and was re-nominated
and re-elected again by a large majority, and is on the close of his
second term, and I don't see any reason why he should not be a
third-termer.




                         CAPT. WILLIAM W. MURPHY,


was born in Westmorland county, Pennsylvania, and is now about thirty-nine
years of age. Went to California in 1854, and after spending several years
on the Pacific coast, returned to Pennsylvania in 1861, and entered the
service as Second Lieutenant, 14th Pennsylvania Cavalry, September, 1862;
soon thereafter promoted to a Captaincy in same regiment for gallantry on
the field of Piedmont, under Gen. Davis Hurter. During his term of service
he received two sabre and three gun-shot wounds, was mustered out of
service with his regiment, September, 1865. The following spring he came
to Minnesota and settled at Madelia, Watonwan county. He was elected by
the Republicans in 1872, as a member of the Legislature from Watonwan. He
is well educated and an intelligent man, especially in the science of
agriculture to which he gives great attention and is quite successful. He
is noted as being a man of great personal daring and courage.




                          COL. THOMAS L. VOUGHT,


is a man of forty-five or forty-eight years of age; large, well built man,
of fine, imposing personal appearance, and if he looks cross at any one,
especially a robber, it would indicate that he meant "business." In fact
he is noted as being extremely kind hearted and pleasant in his way and
manner, but of great reserve force and determination when necessity
requires. Years ago he fought the Indians in that county and weathered
many bitter storms, long distances, night and days alone as stage owner
and driver and United States mail carrier. He is now well known as the
affable owner and host of Flanders Hotel, and has a large local and
transient patronage.




                             GEORGE BRADFORD,


is a young man about twenty-five years of age, son of Morris Bradford,
many years a county officer and old resident. He is a partner of J. N.
Cheney, merchant, a quiet, handsome gentleman, of splendid business
qualifications, of high integrity, regular and attentive to duty, and is
highly respected by the community; he is well educated, and formerly was a
school teacher in the county. He is very firm and unyielding when pushed.




                             BENJAMIN M. RICE


resides in St. James, is a young man, son of Hon. W. D. Rice, ex-Senator
representing that county and district several terms in both branches of
the legislature at St. Paul. Young Mr. Rice was engrossing clerk in the
senate some years ago. He was born in the extreme south, and a resident
there for several years, and possesses in a remarkable degree the fiery
ardor, daring and impetuous power, characteristic of many southern
men--even bordering on recklessness. No more lithe, wiry, or difficult man
to encounter than he if crossed. He is very familiar with the use of
revolvers and weapons, and the equal in accuracy to any one of the
robbers. He is a shrewd and successful business man, warm hearted and a
thorough gentleman in his manner and address.




                             JAMES SEVERSON,


is a young Norwegian, about eighteen or nineteen years of age, who came
from Iowa to be a clerk two years ago in the large store of G. B. Yates.
The jolliest and most popular young man, with everybody, especially his
customers. He speaks several languages well. To his wit and gond nature
everybody will bear witness, especially the ladies; he is a good salesman,
industrious, correct, and to be depended upon; he is short, stout, and a
little "daredevil" if any trouble is on hand.




                             CHARLES POMEROY


is the second son of C. M. Pomeroy, justice of the peace, and who is one
of the oldest and most respected residents of the county. The young man is
short, compact, powerfully built, and is strong, very quiet and
unobtrusive, yet immovable and tenacious when danger threatens; he is a
hardworking, industrious farmer boy, and anything that needs coolness,
courage and determination to make successful, he would be chosen for it.




                          [OSCAR OLESON SUBORN.]

                           OSCAR OLESON SUBORN.


                 [AS HE APPEARED WHEN CARRYING THE NEWS.]

                  AS HE APPEARED WHEN CARRYING THE NEWS.


                           OSCAR OLESON SUBORN,


is American born, of Scandinavian parents, and bears a fine reputation for
truthfulness and industry. We insert two cuts of this lad, one
representing him as he appeared when he carried the news of the robbers
presence to Madelia and the other one showing him as he appears when in
his best clothes.




                           THE YOUNGER FAMILY.


[The principal points in the following sketch were furnished by the
Younger boys and must be received as in a degree partial.--ED.]

Henry W. Younger, the head of this branch of the Younger family was a
native of Kentucky, but early in life he removed to Jackson county,
Missouri, in company with his father's family. The family were thoroughly
respectable, of more than ordinary intelligence, and comfortably provided
with wealth. H. W. Younger proved to be a young man of superior ability,
acquiring an excellent education, and occupying a prominent position in
the political world. Ho served in the Missouri Legislature, and also as
county judge in Jackson county. Col. Younger was married in 1830, and
lived in Jackson county until 1858, during which time fourteen children,
eight girls and six boys, were born to them.

In 1858 the family moved to a larger farm near Harrisonville, Cass county,
where his operations in farming, stock dealing and general trade became
extensive, and his wealth rapidly increased. By his decided, and boldly
maintained political convictions, he made many enemies--especially during
the trouble which occurred between the people of his state and those of
Kansas in regard to the admission of the latter as a slave state.

When the civil war broke out in 1861, Younger espoused the Union cause,
and on account of his wealth and prominence was made the especial object
of the lawless depredations of the "Jayhawkers" of Kansas under Lane,
Jemison and others. His property was destroyed, his stock stolen, and he
with his family was obliged to flee for their lives.

Early in September 1862 as Col. Younger was driving into Harrisonville,
with a large amount of money about him he was robbed and murdered in his
buggy. Even after having disposed of the father, his enemies were not
satisfied, and their aggressions were directed against the inoffensive
widow and her family of young children. They were forced to burn and
abandon their own home, and the poor woman found no peace until finally
she died in Clay county, Missouri.




                              THE CHILDREN.


The oldest son Richard had died in 1860 at the early age of 23, after
having acquired a liberal education, and became an esteemed member of the
Masonic order.

Of the eight sisters six grew up, four being well married, one of the
others dying within a few years, and another still living in maidenhood,
being the one spoken of herein.

The sons that lived to suffer from the aggressions of the enemies of their
father were Thomas Coleman, James Henry, John and Robert Ewing, three of
whom are now in the hands of the law officers of Minnesota, and
incarcerated in the prison at Stillwater.

No apology would be accepted by the public for the course which these men
have pursued since the death of their parents, and no apology will be
offered.

"To err is human; to forgive, divine." Forgiveness was not found in these
men. Revenge was the impulse that actuated them, and now they accept all
mankind as foes. With their education and activity they might doubtless
have become esteemed members of other communities, but they preferred to
allow their resentment to lead them until they became outlaws and branded
criminals. They have stated that they have deliberately chosen their
profession, and are prepared to abide by the consequences. The judgment of
the world is fixed, let a higher power render the verdict.




                             [COLE YOUNGER.]

                              COLE YOUNGER.


                         THOMAS COLEMAN YOUNGER.


This man whose name has become a terror throughout the entire west, was
born January 15th, 1844, in Jackson county, Missouri. He was a bright,
active lad, and somewhat wild. His education is not such as he might have
acquired if he had availed himself of the advantages afforded him in his
early youth. He was always full of daring, and was reckoned a keen young
chap. He appears to have provoked the hatred of certain officers of the
militia under Neugent at the early age of seventeen, and their
persecutions, whether just or unjust, caused him to desert his home, even
his plan of attending school at a distant place being interfered with.

Early in 1862 Cole joined the famous Quantrell band of guerillas, with
whom he remained until late in 1864, when he enlisted in the Confederate
army. He became a captain, and remained in the service until the war
ended, when he went to Mexico and California, where he stayed until 1866.

Cole now resolved to settle down and redeem the family farm, which had
been sadly neglected. His enemies, however, would not permit him to work
in peace, and he together with his brothers James and John were forced to
go to Texas, where they intended to make a new home for their mother, but
she died in 1870, before their plans were completed.

In March, 1875, a preamble and resolution was introduced into the Missouri
house of representatives, relating the crimes charged against the Younger
brothers, and granting them full amnesty and pardon. It was, however,
defeated by a small majority.

Cole Younger possesses talents of no ordinary degree, and his claim that
he could never live a reputable life is absurd, as he could have
established himself in a distant community or in a foreign land and
prospered, if he had so desired. This is proved in the case of his brother
James, who, when the Northfield raid was planned, was living and
prospering in California, where he had accumulated quite a sum of money
and was in a fair way of becoming well off. Money was needed for the
enterprise, and after frequent solicitation he was induced to return to
his old life and embark his savings in the speculation that has proved so
terribly disastrous, and has consigned him to a living tomb.

Cole appears to have early cultivated a taste for the wildest of
adventures, and with a ferocity and cruelly almost fiendish, the taking of
human life, when it interfered with his plans appears to have been no more
to him than the use of hard words among ordinary men. During his
connection with the Quantrell gang he was the boldest and bloodiest of the
outlaws, and was guilty of many terrible deeds when his passions got the
better of his judgment, while at other times he would treat his defeated
antagonists with a magnanimity which showed that there was really a heart
hidden away somewhere about him. At times he would spare none of his
enemies, shooting them down like dogs, even when wounded and unable to
defend themselves, and at other times he would himself nurse and comfort
his most hated foe.

His statement that he NEVER KILLED A MAN except in legitimate conflict, is
of course absurd, and none will believe that a man who has had so
desperate an experience as Cole Younger can place any high value upon
human life. At horse races, in gambling hells, on the prairies, in
railroad trains, and in quiet valleys, he has pursued his nefarious
profession, and satisfied his revenge or gained money by force of arms,
intimidating and killing those who came in his way.

It is told that at a certain horse race he had wagered money on his horse,
but one of the crowd, all of whom were enemies of Cole, by a cowardly
trick caused his horse to lose. He forbade the stake-holder to deliver the
money to his opponent, and when he insisted upon doing so Cole drew two
large pistols and as he dashed away he discharged them into the crowd
killing three men, and escaping unharmed.

The exploits of Quantrell and his men have been so often published that it
is not necessary to rehearse them at this time, but in nearly all of the
most desperate and bloody encounters of the desperate gang Cole Younger
played a prominent part. He was appointed to lead the most dangerous
expeditions, and his success was such that it appeared as if the DEVIL
HIMSELF WERE AT HIS ELBOW.

One of the most sad and cruel murders that Younger was forced to commit,
was when, after a visit to his grandmother, he was met on the threshold by
his cousin, Captain Charles Younger, who belonged to the militia of the
state. The cousins shook hands, after which Captain Younger informed his
relative that he was his prisoner. Instantly Cole drew his revolver, and
placing it in front of his cousin's face fired, killing him instantly.
Although the vicinity was filled with militiamen the guerilla made good
his escape with his usual luck.




                            WHOLESALE KILLING.


It is related that at one time Quantrell's company, after an encounter
with a party of jayhawkers, found fifteen prisoners on their hands. As was
the custom, arrangements were speedily made to put them to death. Among
the arms captured was an Enfield rifle, and as none of the guerillas had
ever seen one before, it was decided to test its merits, as they had heard
that its force was terrible. The poor prisoners were placed in a row one
behind the other, and Cole Younger, claiming that the weapon ought to kill
ten men at a shot, deliberately fired at fifteen paces. The rifle
disappointed the bloody executioner, as it killed but the first three men.
Seven shots were fired by the cruel marksman before the fifteen were
disposed of.





                         AS A FOOT-PAD AND ROBBER


Cole Younger is charged with having been connected with a great number of
wild adventures where stages, railroad trains, banks and stores have been
robbed, and his connection with them is not doubted by many, although he
has proved by respectable parties that he had nothing to do with some of
them.

A series of desperate crimes commenced to be committed as early as 1868,
and it was evident that a regularly organized band existed. It was, and
is, believed that the Younger brothers and the James brothers were the
leading spirits of the organization, and that it consisted of desperate
characters living in all parts of the western states as far south as Texas
and north through the territories. In 1868 a bank was robbed in
Russellville, Ky., and a good haul was made. In the same year the bank at
Gallaten, Mo., was attacked, and the cashier, J. W. Sheets, was killed.

In August, 1873, the safe belonging to Wells, Fargo & Co's express company
was taken from a stage in Nevada territory, by four masked brigands, and
broken open and robbed of about $12,000 in gold and greenbacks, while the
driver and passengers were prevented from interfering by cocked guns held
at their heads.

In January, 1874, a stage en route for the Arkansas Hot Springs, was
stopped at Gain's place by five men wearing army overcoats, and all of the
passengers were forced to give up all of their money and valuables. There
were a number of gold watches taken, the robbers declining to receive any
silver ones, and the sums of money received ranged from $5 to $650. The
robbers asked if any of the passengers had been in the Confederate army,
and when one responded in the affirmative, his property was returned to
him, with the remark that they only robbed Northern men, who had driven
them into outlawry. Another man who was entirely crippled by rheumatism
was not interfered with and was not robbed.

In February, 1874, the First National Bank of Quincy, Illinois, was robbed
of over $500,000 in money and bonds, but as the work was done in the
night, it is thought that the Younger gang was not concerned in it, as
they have never been known as burglars, but bold, daring highwaymen, who
work openly.

It is thought there can be no doubt but that the Youngers were among the
gang that attacked the train at Gad's Hill, in 1873, as it was one of the
boldest robberies on record, the passengers in an entire train being
intimidated and robbed by a few men.

Cole Younger was one of the principal actors in the Northfield tragedy,
leading the squad which dashed through the streets to intimidate the
inhabitants while his comrades robbed the bank. Undoubtedly he is accused
of many crimes he never committed, but he has made himself a name that
will long exist, as one of the most bold and reckless outlaws of modern
times.

He claims that he is now for the first time in prison, and one cannot but
wonder how, in this age of intelligence and civilization, so terrible a
freebooter could have carried on his nefarious business for fourteen long
years almost unmolested.





                           [JAMES H. YOUNGER.]

                            JAMES H. YOUNGER.


                            JAMES H. YOUNGER.


The next brother, James H. Younger, is now about 29 years of age, and is
one of the captives now in the State prison. He has suffered greatly from
his wounds received at the time of his capture. He is a mild, inoffensive
looking man, and would not be taken for a robber and murderer. He has
always been the pet of the family, and after the fight at Madelia which
closed his career as a bandit, his brothers Cole and Bob showed great
anxiety about him.

Cole said he did not fear death as it would be over in five minutes, but
he entreated the attending doctor to "exercise his utmost skill on Jim,
who was always a good boy." Bob also asked several times for Jim,
displaying much concern for his welfare.

When their young sister, Miss Ret Younger, visited them in their prison on
the 3d of October, 1876, she was terribly excited in finding James in such
a plight, and gave way to sobs and shrieks.

James joined Quantrell's company in 1863, but in the autumn of 1864 he was
taken prisoner in the skirmish which resulted in the death of the
notorious leader, and was incarcerated in the military prison at Alton,
Ill., where he remained until the middle of 1866. He has been more
domestic in his tastes than his brothers, although he has been in many
desperate scrapes, and when the Northfield robbery was planned he was
living in California as stated elsewhere.





                              [BOB YOUNGER.]

                               BOB YOUNGER.


                            ROBERT E. YOUNGER.


This is the youngest of the boys, being now nearly 23 years of age. He is
quite prepossessing in appearance, and excited the sympathy of the ladies
especially in his captivity. His career of crime extends over about three
years, commencing when he was charged with horse stealing in connection
with his brother John. Until that time he had remained quietly at home,
being the only protector his mother had until her death, and his sister
since. Bob was one of the men in the bank at Northfield and was to have
taken the money.





                              CHARLES PITTS.


This bandit who was killed at Madelia, is known throughout the south as
Wells. He is presumed to be the man that shot the brave cashier. He is
reputed to have been one of the most daring of southern horse thieves, and
possessed a great knowledge of horses. His nature was brutal, and he was
as bold and tenacious as a bull dog. The gang always engaged him when
particularly dirty work was on hand, and when on a long tramp, as his
horse education made him valuable in the care of stock. His body has been
embalmed and is now in the possession of the surgeon-general of Minnesota,
whose museum his skeleton will ultimately grace.

                             [CHARLEY PITTS.]

                              CHARLEY PITTS.





                           THE JAMES BROTHERS.


It is supposed that the two robbers that succeeded in escaping, leaving
six of the gang in Minnesota, three captives and three dead, were the
notorious James boys, Frank and Jesse. These bandits claim, as do the
Younger brothers, that they were forced to a course of crime by the
aggressions of their enemies.

From the close of the war down to the present time these men have been
outlaws, and a long list of crimes are laid at their door. Among others
may be named the robbing of the bank at Russellville, Ky., in March, 1868.
The attack on the bank of Gallaten, Mo., and the kilting of the cashier,
J. W. Sheets, in December of the same year. Another bank robbery at
Corydon, Iowa, in June, 1871. Another in Columbia, Ky., when the cashier
was killed, and still another robbery of the bank of St. Genevieve, Mo.,
May, 1873. The attack on the railroad train at Gad's Hill in 1873, the
more recent robbery, in December, 1875, of the express company's safe on a
train on the Kansas Pacific Railroad at Muncie, where $30,000 was secured,
and the Otterville robbery on the Missouri Pacific Railroad last July. All
are laid to this wonderful gang of bandits which includes the James and
Younger boys and a working gang of perhaps fifteen others.

In January, 1875, a desperate attempt was made to capture the James
brothers by Pinkerton's detective police, by surrounding and firing the
house in which their mother, now the wife of Dr. Samuels of Clay county,
Mo., lived. It was a sad failure, one person being killed and several
wounded. There are no good likenessess of these robbers extant, the only
ones the police have being eight years old, and Cole Younger says they
look nothing like them.

                           [HEYWOOD'S BURIAL.]

                            HEYWOOD'S BURIAL.





                          NAMES OF CONTRIBUTORS.


At a meeting of the banks and bankers of St. Paul, Minn., Sept. 19th 1876,
the following gentlemen, Henry P. Upham, Walter Mann, and John S. Prince
were appointed a committee to issue a circular appeal to the banks and
bankers in the United States and Canada, requesting voluntary
contributions in aid of the family of Joseph Lee Heywood, late acting
Cashier of the first national bank of Northfield, Minn., who was instantly
killed by a pistol shot by one of the gang of Younger-James Bros.,
desperadoes. In answer to about seven thousand circulars that were sent
out, the committee received Twelve Thousand Six Hundred and Two Dollars
and Six Cents($12,6022.06), which, with the Five Thousand Dollars donated
by the First National Bank of Northfield to Mrs. Heywood and her child,
made the sum of Seventeen Thousand Six Hundred and Two Dollars and Six
Cents, ($17,602.06), a handsome tribute to the brave and noble cashier,
who sacrificed his life rather than betray his trust.

It is estimated that upwards of Ten Thousand Dollars has been expended by
the First National Bank of Northfield, the State and County authorities,
and private citizens, in capturing the robbers.

The following are the names of the contributors:




                              MASSACHUSETTS.


Monson National      Monson            $5
Bank
Merchants National   Salem             25
Bank
Geo. L. Ames         Salem              2
Franklin County      Greenfield        25
National Bank
Adams National       North Adams       20
Bank
First National       Northampton       50
Bank
Lechmere National    East Cambridge    25
Bank
Framingham           Framingham        50
National Bank
Asiatic National     Salem             25
Bank
Geo. E. Bullard      Boston            10
Salem Savings Bank   Salem            100
Safety Fund          Fitchburg         20
National Bank
Naumkeag National    Salem            100
Bank
National City Bank   Boston           100
C. C. Barry          {~DITTO MARK~}                 10
Northboro National   Northboro         10
Bank
Mercantile           Salem             25
National Bank
Charles River        Cambridge         25
National Bank
Bay State National   Lawrence          50
Bank
Crocker National     Turners Falls     20
Bank
South Danvers        Peabody           25
National Bank
Worcester National   Worcester         25
Bank
City National Bank   {~DITTO MARK~}                 25
Central National     {~DITTO MARK~}                 25
Bank
Merchants National   {~DITTO MARK~}                 25
Bank
Security National    {~DITTO MARK~}                 25
Bank
Quinsigamond         {~DITTO MARK~}                 25
National Bank
Citizens National    {~DITTO MARK~}                 25
Bank
First National       {~DITTO MARK~}                 25
Bank
Worcester Co. Inst   {~DITTO MARK~}                 25
for Savings
Worcester            {~DITTO MARK~}                 25
Mechanics Savings
Bank
People's Savings     {~DITTO MARK~}                 25
Bank
Worcester Five       {~DITTO MARK~}                 25
Cent Savings Bank
Worcester Safe       {~DITTO MARK~}                 25
Dep. & Trust Co
Salem National       Salem             25
Bank
National Granite     Quincy            10
Bank
Central National     Lynn              20
Bank
Townsend National    Townsend          10
Bank
Housatonic           Stockbridge       10
National Bank
Leicester National   Leicester         20
Bank
Conway National      Conway            15
Bank




                                NEW YORK.


National Bank        West Troy           $10
Bank of America {~DITTO MARK~}    New York             50
Tanners National     Catskill             10
Bank
J. G. Munro          Buffalo              10
Marine Bank          {~DITTO MARK~}                    10
H. F. Spaulding,     New York             10
President Cen.
Trust Co.
Brown Bros. & Co     {~DITTO MARK~}                    25
Importers &          {~DITTO MARK~}                    25
Traders National
Bank
Farmers &            Buffalo              10
Mechanics National
Bank
F. R. Delano & Co    Niagara Falls         5
Ten Banks in         Syracuse            100
Lyons National       Lyons                 5
Bank
Manufacturers        Troy                 25
National Bank
First National       New York             25
Bank
Fisk & Hatch         {~DITTO MARK~}                    20
E. P. Cook           Havana                5
National Central     Cherry Valley        10
Bank
National Bank of     Salem                10
Salem
Merchants National   New York             50
Bank
Munroe County        Rochester             5
Savings Bank
Mechanics National   New York             10
Bank
G. H. Smith          Haverstraw           10
City Bank            Oswego               10
Manufacturers        Williamsburg         10
National Bank
Bank of North        New York             25
America
Manhattan Co.        {~DITTO MARK~}                    50
Metropolitan         {~DITTO MARK~}                   150
National Bank
W. W. Astor          {~DITTO MARK~}                   500
Gallatin National    {~DITTO MARK~}                   100
Bank
Executive            {~DITTO MARK~}                    55
Commercial
Mercantile Trust
Co.
First National       Red Hook             10
Bank
First National       Jamestown            10
Bank
Farmers National     Amsterdam            10
Bank
Chemical National    New York             25
Bank
New York Savings     {~DITTO MARK~}                   100
Bank
American Ex.         {~DITTO MARK~}                    25
National Bank
J. T. Foote          {~DITTO MARK~}                    50
First National       Champlain             6
Bank
Witmer Bros.         Suspension Bridge     5
City National Bank   Jamestown             5
Manufacturers Bank   Cohoes               10
C. P. Williams       Albany               10
First National       Rondont              20
Bank
Third National       New York             50
Bank




                                MISSOURI.


Bank of Holden       Holden            $5
People's Savings     Chilicothe         5
Bank
Third National       St. Louis         25
Bank
Montgomery County    Montgomery City    5
Bank
Boone County         Columbia          10
National Bank
First National       St. Joseph         5
Bank
Bank of Joplin       Joplin             5
First National       Kansas City       10
Bank
Scotland County      Memphis            5
Bank
Farmer and Drovers   Carthage           5
Bank
Bank of Commerce     St. Louis         50
First National       Paris             10
Bank
Lawrence County      Pierce City        5
Bank
Franklin Avenue      St. Louis         25
German Savings In
Waverly Bank         Waverly            5
Aull Savings Bank    Lexington          5




                                TENNESSEE.


First National   Chattanooga   $10
Bank
Commercial       Knoxville       5
National Bank




                                  OHIO.


Jos. F. Larkin &     Cincinnati       $5
Co
Ramsey & Teeple      Delta             1
Farmers Bank         Wapakoneta        5
Second National      Toledo           25
Bank
First National       Massillon        10
Bank
First National       Portsmouth        5
Bank
Harrison National    Cadiz             5
Bank
Commercial           Cleveland        20
National Bank
Barber & Merrill     Wauseon          10
First National       Troy             20
Bank
Merchants National   Dayton           25
Bank
Youngstown Savings   Youngstown       25
and Loan
Association
Wicks Bros. & Co     {~DITTO MARK~}                10
Second National      {~DITTO MARK~}                25
Bank
First National       {~DITTO MARK~}                25
Bank
First National       Springfield      15
Bank
First National       East Liverpool   10
Bank
First National       Ashland           5
Bank




                                MICHIGAN.


Second National      Detroit        $100
Bank
Second National      Hillsdale         5
Bank
First National       Plymouth         10
Bank
First National       St. Joseph       10
Bank
First National       Port Huron       10
Bank
Randall & Darrah     Grand Rapids     10
National Bank of     Marshall         10
Michigan
Boies, Rude & Co.    Hudson            5
First National       Houghton         50
Bank
First National       Dowagiac         10
Batik
Ann Arbor Savings    Ann Arbor        10
Bank
Perkins, Thompson    Hudson            5
& Co
First National       Hancock          25
Bank
Merchants & Miners   Calumet          15
Bank




                                 INDIANA.


Richmond National   Richmond         $5
Bank
Fort Wayne          Fort Wayne       10
National Bank
Citizens National   Jeffersonville    5
Bank
First National      New Albany       25
Bank
Brazil Bank         Brazil            5
Walkers Bank        Kokomo            1
Citizens National   Greensburg        5
Bank
National Branch     Madison          25
Bank
First National      Richmond         25
Bank
Citizens National   Peru             10
Bank
First National      Tell City        10
Bank




                                ILLINOIS.


First National       Marseilles       $5
Bank
Commercial           Chicago           5
National Bank
Chicago Clearings    {~DITTO MARK~}             1,000
House Association
Union National       Aurora            5
Bank
J. A. Beach          Bunker Hill       1
"A Friend"           Girard            1
Bank of Forreston    Forreston         2
Geo. Wright          Paxton         1.50
First National       Peoria           10
Bank
First National       Princeton         5
Bank
City National Bank   Cairo             5
Peoples Bank         Bloomington       5
Scott & Wrigley      Wyoming           5
C. G. Cloud          McLeansboro       5
Union National       Streator         10
Bank
Knowlton Bros        Freeport          5
Alton National       Alton             5
Bank
W. F. Thornton &     Shelbyville      25
Son
Farmers National     Keithsburg       10
Bank
First National       Freeport         10
Bank
First National       Kankakee         20
Bank
First National       Ottawa           15
Bank
Citizens National    {~DITTO MARK~}                15
Bank
First National       Quincy           10
Bank
First National       Arcola            2
Bank
Edgar Co. National   Paris             5
Bank
Griggsville          Griggsville      10
National Bank
Cass Co. Bank        Beardstown        5
First National       Knoxville        10
Bank
T. W. Raymond & Co   Kinmundy          5
Ridgely National     Springfield       5
Bank
First National       Warsaw           10
Bank
First National       Shawneetown      10
Bank
First National       Rushville        10
Bank
Stetson,             Farmington       10
Littlewood &
Richards
First National       Canton           10
Bank
First National       Centralia      2.50
Bank




                                  MAINE.


First National      Brunswick         $10
Bank
West Waterville     West Waterville     5
National Bank
First National      Damariscotta        5
Bank
People's National   Waterville          5
Bank
Banks in            Portland          150




                                 VERMONT.


First National   Fairhaven   $10
Bank
First National   Orwell       10
Bank




                                ARKANSAS.


National Bank      Fort Smith   $5
Western Arkansas




                               CALIFORNIA.


Bank of Woodland    Woodland           $5
Caisse d'Epargnes   San Francisco      10
francaise
Kern Valley Bank    Bakersfield      5.45
First National      Oakland            10
Gold Bank
Nevada Bank         San Francisco     100
Santa Barbara       Santa Barbara   10.80
County Bank




                                COLORADO.


First National      Denver     $10
Bank
First National      Trinidad     1
Bank
Emerson & West      Greeley      5
Colorado National   Denver      20
Bank




                            DAKOTA TERRITORY.


Mark M. Parmer   Yankton   2




                              NEW HAMPSHIRE.


Claremont National   Claremont   $10
Bank
Castleton National   Castleton     5
Bank
National Bank of     Lebanon      10
Lebanon
Littleton National   Littleton    10
Bank




                                  TEXAS.


Ragnet & Fry       Marshall      $10
J. R. Couts & Co   Weatherford     2
Merchants and      Sherman        10
Planters Bank
First National     Parsons         5
Bank




                              RHODE ISLAND.


Roger Williams       Providence    $25
National Bank
Manufacturers        {~DITTO MARK~}              25
National Bank
Washington           Westerly       50
National Bank
National Phoenix     {~DITTO MARK~}              15
Bank
National Exchange    Providence     25
Bank
Centerville          Centreville     5
National Bank
Warwick Institute    {~DITTO MARK~}              10
for Savings
Merchants National   Providence      5
Bank




                               CONNECTICUT.


First National      Middletown   $20
Bank
First National      Stamford      25
Bank
Phoenix National    Hartford      50
Bank
Geo. A. Butler      New Haven      5
Banks of            Bridgeport    90
Bridgeport.
Hartford National   Hartford      50
Bank
Deep River          Deep River    10
National Bank
Stamford National   Stamford      10
Bank
Farmers &           Middletown    15
Mechanics Savings
Bank
Norwich Savings     Norwich       20
Bank
Thames National     {~DITTO MARK~}             30
Bank




                              PENNSYLVANIA.


First National       Columbia          $5
Bank
First National       Sharon             5
Bink
Pittsburgh           Pittsburgh       200
Clearing House
Association.
National Bank        Pottstown .       10
First National       Oil City          10
Bank
National Bank,       Coatesvillle      25
Chester Valley
First National       Pittston          25
Bank
Watsontown Bank      Watsontown         5
Cassatt & Co         Philadelphia      20
First National       Shippensburg       5
Bank
First National       Hanover            5
Bank Hanover
First National       Strasburg          5
Bank
St. Petersburg       St. Petersburg     2
Savings Bank
Marine National      Erie              25
Bank
National Bank,       Uniontown          5
Fayette Co
National Bank,       Chester           10
Chester Co
Marine National      Pittsburg         25
Bank
Columbia National    Columbia          10
Bank
Citizens National    Ashland           15
Bank
Doylstown National   Doylestown        10
Bank
Spring Garden Bank   Philadelphia       5
National Bank,       Oxford            10
Oxford
First National       Altoona           10
Bank
Commercial           Philadelphia      25
National Bank of
Pennsylvania
National Bank        {~DITTO MARK~}                 20
Republic
Union National       {~DITTO MARK~}                 10
Bank
National Bank of     Phoenixville      10
Farmers &            {~DITTO MARK~}                  5
Mechanics National
Bank
Bank of North        Philadelphia     250
America
W. L. DuBois         {~DITTO MARK~}                 10




                                  IOWA.


First National       Belle Plaine     5
Bank
Levitt, Johnson &    Waterloo         5
Lursch
First National       Boone            2
Bank
First National       Wyoming         10
Bank
First National       Decorah          5
Bank
National State       Burlington      25
Bank
Conger, Pierce &     Dexter           2
Co
E. Manning           Keosaugua       10
First National       Chariton         5
Bank
Citizen's National   Winterset       10
Bank
H. F. Greef & Bro    Beautonsport     5
Council Bluff        Council Bluff    5
Savings Bank
Greene County Bank   Jefferson        2
Muscatine National   Muscatine       10
Bank
State National       Keokuk          10
Bank
First National       Red Oak         10
Bank
Davenport National   Davenport       25
Bank
Bank of Carroll      Carroll City     5
Cerro Gordo County   Mason City       5
Bank
Clinton National     Clinton         50
Bank
Silverman, Cook &    Muscatine        5
Co
First National       Grinnell         5
Bank




                                 KANSAS.


Topeka National     Topeka         $5
Bank
Abilene Bank        Abilene         1
Humboldt Bank       Humboldt        1
D. W. Powers & Co   Ellsworth       5
Emporia National    Emporia         2
Bank
Turner & Otis       Independence    5




                                MARYLAND.


First National     Baltimore     $50
Bank
National Union     {~DITTO MARK~}              25
Bank
First National     Westminster     5
Bank
National Bank of   Baltimore      25
Baltimore




                                 CANADA.


Merchants Bank,   Hamilton      $6
Canada
Bank of Toronto   Toronto    21.90
Thos. Fyshe       Halifax    10.90




                                KENTUCKY.


Theo. Schwartz &   Louisville   $5
Co
National Bank of   Cynthiana     5
Cynthiana
German National    Covington    25
Bank




                                 ALABAMA.


City National Bank   Selma   $10




                             SOUTH CAROLINA.


South Carolina    Charleston   $15
Loan & Trust Co
National Bank     Anderson      20




                               MISSISSIPPI.


Vicksburgh Bank   Vicksburg   $10




                               NEW JERSEY.


First National   Morristown   $50
Bank




                                MINNESOTA.


First National       St. Paul          $100
Bank
Second National      {~DITTO MARK~}                  100
Bank
Merchants National                      100
Bank
German American      {~DITTO MARK~}                   75
Bank
Dawson & Co          {~DITTO MARK~}                   50
Marine Bank          {~DITTO MARK~}                   25
Farmers &            {~DITTO MARK~}                   25
Mechanics Bank
Savings Bank         {~DITTO MARK~}                   25
"A Friend"           {~DITTO MARK~}                   50
Northwestern         Minneapolis        100
National Bank
Merchants National   {~DITTO MARK~}                   10
Bank
First National       {~DITTO MARK~}                   25
Bank
National Exchange    {~DITTO MARK~}                   25
Bank
State National       {~DITTO MARK~}                   10
Bank
Hennepin County      {~DITTO MARK~}                   10
Savings Bank
Citizens National    Faribault           50
Bank
C. H. Whipple        {~DITTO MARK~}                   25
First National       Kasson              25
Bank
First National       Shakopee            25
Bank
First National       Lake City           10
Bank
A Printer            Waseca               2
First National       Le Hoy              10
Bank for Customer
Citizens National    Mankato             50
Bank
Farmers National     Owatonna            10
Bank
Bank of Washington   Worthington          5
First National       Stillwater          25
Bank
Chadbourn Bros &     Blue Earth City      5
Co
Farmers & Traders    Hastings            25
Bank
O. Roos              Taylors Falls        5
First National       Faribault           50
Bank
Lumbermens           Stillwater          25
National Bank
H. D. Brown & Co     Albert Lea          15
First National       Red Wing            25
Bank
Pierce, Simmons &    {~DITTO MARK~}                   20
Co
First National       Austin             100
Bank
Bank of Farmington   Farmington          25
H. H. Bell           Duluth               5
City Bank            Minneapolis         25
Eddy & Erskine       Plainview           10
First National       St. Peter           25
Bank
First National       Hastings            25
Bank




                                WISCONSIN.


First National       Milwaukee           $50
Bank
National Exchange    {~DITTO MARK~}                    25
Bank
Manufacturers        Racine               10
National Bank
First National       Whitewater           20
Bank
Wisconsin Marine &   Milwaukee            50
Fire Ins. Co. Bank
First National       Hudson               10
Bink
Bank of Evansville   Evansville            5
Batavian Bank        La Crosse            10
National Bank        Delavan               5
First National       Munroe               10
Bank
Bowman & Humbird     Black River Falls     5
Milwaukee National   Milwaukee            25
Bank
Second Ward          {~DITTO MARK~}                   100
Savings Bank
German Bank          Sheboygan            10
J. F. Cleghorn       Clinton               5
Savings Bank         Fond du Lac           5
Kellogg National     Green Bay            25
Bank
First National       Madison              10
Bank
Waukesha National    Waukesha             10
Bank
Marshall & Ilsley    Milwaukee            25
Shullsburg Bank      Shullsburg            5
First National       Fond du Lac          10
Bank
Humphry & Clark      Bloomington           5




                                DELAWARE.


Delaware City        Delaware     $10
National Bank
First National       Wilmington    25
Bank
Union National       {~DITTO MARK~}             20
Bank
National Bank of     {~DITTO MARK~}             10
Delaware
National Bank of     {~DITTO MARK~}             20
Wilmington & B. W.
Newport National     Newport       20
Bank




                              WEST VIRGINIA.


Merchants National   Morganstown   $5
Bank of W.
Virginia
Commercial Bank      Wheeling      10
Exchange Bank        {~DITTO MARK~}              5




                                VIRGINIA.


Planters &       Petersburg    $10
Mechanics Bank
German Banking   .Alexandria     5
Company




                                LOUISIANA.


Citizens Bank of   New Orleans   $  10
Louisiana




                                 GEORGIA.


Bank of Americus   Americus   $1




                                   UTAH


Deseret National   Salt Lake City   $10
Bank




                                 OREGON.


First National   Portland   $50
Bank
Ladd & Tilton    {~DITTO MARK~}            5
"Unknown"                     2




 Collected by a Committee of Associated Banks in Boston, Massachusetts.
                        H. W. PICKERING, Chairman.


Taunton National     Taunton             $30
Bank
Old Boston           Boston              100
National Bank
Second  {~DITTO MARK~}  {~DITTO MARK~}         {~DITTO MARK~}                   100
Merchants  {~DITTO MARK~}  {~DITTO MARK~}      {~DITTO MARK~}                   150
Howard  {~DITTO MARK~}  {~DITTO MARK~}                             100
Suffolk  {~DITTO MARK~}           {~DITTO MARK~}                   100
Faneuil Hall  {~DITTO MARK~}      {~DITTO MARK~}                   100
Blackstone  {~DITTO MARK~}  {~DITTO MARK~}     {~DITTO MARK~}                   100
Tremont  {~DITTO MARK~}  {~DITTO MARK~}        {~DITTO MARK~}                   100
Exchange  {~DITTO MARK~}  {~DITTO MARK~}       {~DITTO MARK~}                   100
Maverick  {~DITTO MARK~}  {~DITTO MARK~}       {~DITTO MARK~}                   100
Revere  {~DITTO MARK~}  {~DITTO MARK~}         {~DITTO MARK~}                   100
North  {~DITTO MARK~}  {~DITTO MARK~}          {~DITTO MARK~}                   100
Shoe & Leather {~DITTO MARK~}     {~DITTO MARK~}                   100
{~DITTO MARK~}
Shawmut  {~DITTO MARK~}  {~DITTO MARK~}        {~DITTO MARK~}                   100
Everett  {~DITTO MARK~}  {~DITTO MARK~}        {~DITTO MARK~}                    50
Third  {~DITTO MARK~}  {~DITTO MARK~}          {~DITTO MARK~}                    50
Eagle  {~DITTO MARK~} {~DITTO MARK~}           {~DITTO MARK~}                    50
Traders {~DITTO MARK~} {~DITTO MARK~}          {~DITTO MARK~}                    50
First  {~DITTO MARK~}  {~DITTO MARK~}          {~DITTO MARK~}                    50
Market  {~DITTO MARK~}  {~DITTO MARK~}         {~DITTO MARK~}                    50
Redemption  {~DITTO MARK~}  {~DITTO MARK~}     {~DITTO MARK~}                    50
Webster National     Boston               50
Bank
Hamilton  {~DITTO MARK~}   {~DITTO MARK~}      {~DITTO MARK~}                    50
Freemans   {~DITTO MARK~}   {~DITTO MARK~}     {~DITTO MARK~}                    50
Massachusetts {~DITTO MARK~}      {~DITTO MARK~}                    50
{~DITTO MARK~}
Boylston   {~DITTO MARK~}   {~DITTO MARK~}     {~DITTO MARK~}                    50
New England {~DITTO MARK~}   {~DITTO MARK~}    {~DITTO MARK~}                    50
Hide & Leather   {~DITTO MARK~}   {~DITTO MARK~}                    50
{~DITTO MARK~}
Massachusetts        {~DITTO MARK~}                   100
Hosp. Life
Insurance Co
Union Sale Dep.      {~DITTO MARK~}                   100
Vaults
Appleton National    Lowell               50
Bank
Railroad National    {~DITTO MARK~}                    25
Bank
Chapin Banking       Springfield          50
Company
Bank of Brighton     Brighton             30
Warren National      Peabody              25
Bank
Millers Rivers       Athol                25
National Bank
First National       Greenfield           25
Bank
Cambridge City       Cambridge            15
National Bank
Pacific National     Nantucket            15
Bank
Merchants National   Newburyport          15
Bank
Newburyport          {~DITTO MARK~}                    20
Savings Bank
First National       {~DITTO MARK~}                    20
Bank
Ocean National       {~DITTO MARK~}                    15
Bank
Mechanics National   {~DITTO MARK~}                    15
Bank
Five Cent Savings    {~DITTO MARK~}                    10
Bank
Cambridgeport        Cambridgeport        15
National Bank
National City Bank   Lynn                 25
American National    Hartford, Conn       25
Bank
Mercantile           {~DITTO MARK~}                    25
National Bank
Birmingham           Birmingham, Conn     20
National Bank
Central National     Middletown,  {~DITTO MARK~}       15
Bank
Waterbury National   Waterbury,  {~DITTO MARK~}       200
Bank
Middlesex County     Middletown,  {~DITTO MARK~}       10
National Bank
Employees of above   {~DITTO MARK~}                    10
bank
New Haven County     New Haven,  {~DITTO MARK~}        10
National Bank
First National       Augusta, Maine       25
Bank
Granite {~DITTO MARK~}   {~DITTO MARK~}        {~DITTO MARK~}  {~DITTO MARK~}                 25
First  {~DITTO MARK~}   {~DITTO MARK~}         Concord, {~DITTO MARK~}           25
Calais  {~DITTO MARK~}   {~DITTO MARK~}        Calais,  {~DITTO MARK~}           10
Freemans {~DITTO MARK~}   {~DITTO MARK~}       Augusta,  {~DITTO MARK~}          10
Kennebec Savings     {~DITTO MARK~}                    10
Bank
Cabasse National {~DITTO MARK~}   Gardiner {~DITTO MARK~}           10
Gardiner  {~DITTO MARK~} {~DITTO MARK~}        {~DITTO MARK~}                     5
Bath    {~DITTO MARK~}   {~DITTO MARK~}        Bath   {~DITTO MARK~}              5
Falls Village        {~DITTO MARK~}                     5
Savings Bank
Third National  {~DITTO MARK~}    Providence, R; I.    25
Bank of North        {~DITTO MARK~}     {~DITTO MARK~}              20
America
Slater National      Pawtucket,  {~DITTO MARK~}        50
Bank
Rhode Island         Weybasset,  {~DITTO MARK~}        10
National Bank
Niantic National     Westerley,  {~DITTO MARK~}        10
Bank
Rhode Island         {~DITTO MARK~}    {~DITTO MARK~}               10
National Bank
Rockingham           Portsmouth, N. H.    20
National Bank
Strafford National   Dover, N. H..        10
Bank
National State       Concord, N. H.       25
Capital Bank
Bank of Derby Line   Derby, Vt            10
Montpielier          Montpelier, Vt.      20
National Bank

Total amount collected by
committee of associated
Banks of Boston $3430






***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NORTHFIELD TRAGEDY, OR THE ROBBER'S RAID***



CREDITS


January 6, 2014

            Project Gutenberg edition 10
            Martin Schub



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 44609.txt or 44609.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/4/6/0/44609/


Updated editions will replace the previous one -- the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
-- you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


"Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation" or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work (any work on which the phrase
"Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project Gutenberg"
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation."

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES -- Except for the "Right of
Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND -- If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY -- You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}


Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}'s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***
