The Project Gutenberg EBook of Bow-Wow and Mew-Mew, by Georgiana M. Craik

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Bow-Wow and Mew-Mew

Author: Georgiana M. Craik

Editor: Joseph C. Sindelar

Release Date: February 15, 2014 [EBook #44914]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOW-WOW AND MEW-MEW ***




Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







[Transcriber's Note: Bold text is surrounded by =equal signs= and
italic text is surrounded by _underscores_. Obvious punctuation errors
have been repaired however the unusual use of quotation marks in
continuing paragraphs was retained as printed.]

[Illustration: "The lady came into the room to find out why the dog had
called out. Mew-Mew ... crept out." _Page 19._]




BOW-WOW AND MEW-MEW

    BY
    GEORGIANA M. CRAIK


    EDITED BY
    JOSEPH C. SINDELAR


    _Author of_ NIXIE BUNNY IN MANNERS-LAND
    NIXIE BUNNY IN WORKADAY-LAND
    NIXIE BUNNY IN HOLIDAY-LAND
    NIXIE BUNNY IN FARAWAY-LANDS
    FATHER THRIFT AND HIS ANIMAL FRIENDS
    MORNING EXERCISES FOR ALL THE YEAR
    BEST MEMORY GEMS

[Illustration]

    BECKLEY-CARDY COMPANY
    CHICAGO




    COPYRIGHT, 1914, BY
    JOSEPH C. SINDELAR

    _Made in U. S. A._




[Illustration]




CONTENTS


    CHAPTER                                               PAGE
          I BOW-WOW AND MEW-MEW                              7
         II BOW-WOW AND MEW-MEW ARE NOT HAPPY                9
        III MEW-MEW FALLS ASLEEP                            11
         IV THE CHICKS, THE PIGS, THE DUCKS                 13
          V BOW-WOW IS HURT                                 16
         VI BOW-WOW IN BED                                  18
        VII MEW-MEW BY THE FIRE                             20
       VIII BOW-WOW IN GREAT PAIN                           21
         IX MEW-MEW A NURSE                                 24
          X BOW-WOW FEELS VERY ILL                          27
         XI WILL BOW-WOW DIE?                               29
        XII BOW-WOW AND MEW-MEW BECOME FRIENDS              31
       XIII MEW-MEW SEEKS SOME FOOD                         34
        XIV BOW-WOW DOES NOT DIE                            37
         XV BOW-WOW AND MEW-MEW ARE VERY GREAT FRIENDS      39
        XVI BOW-WOW AND MEW-MEW WILL GO AWAY                41
       XVII SHALL THEY START SO SOON?                       44
      XVIII SAYING "GOOD-BY"                                46
        XIX BOW-WOW AND MEW-MEW SET OFF                     48
         XX RUNNING AWAY                                    51
        XXI IS IT GOOD FUN?                                 52
       XXII IN THE FIELDS                                   55
      XXIII PUSS FALLS LAME                                 57
       XXIV IN THE CORN-FIELD                               59
        XXV THE FIRST MEAL                                  62
       XXVI THE WORK OF EACH RUNAWAY                        64
      XXVII THE BIG SHEEP-DOG                               66
     XXVIII BOW-WOW IS BADLY HURT                           69
       XXIX PUSS TURNS NURSE                                71
        XXX CROSS WORDS                                     73
       XXXI HOW THE RUNAWAYS FARED                          76
      XXXII KIND FRIENDS                                    78
     XXXIII BAD BLOWS                                       80
      XXXIV THOUGHTS OF HOME                                83
       XXXV WHERE WAS HOME?                                 85
      XXXVI PUSS FALLS ILL                                  87
     XXXVII THE OLD FARM-HOUSE                              88
    XXXVIII HOME                                            90
      XXXIX TELL US MORE                                    92
            ABOUT THE BOOK                                  95


[Illustration]




Bow-Wow and Mew-Mew

[Illustration]




I

BOW-WOW AND MEW-MEW


"Get out of the way," said a little fat dog, as he came near the fire.

"I shall not get out of your way," said the white puss, who had got
the best place first. "Do you keep out of my way!"

"You are as bad a cat as ever I saw," cried the dog, in a rage.

The dog's name was Bow-Wow.

"I am not half so bad a cat as you are a dog," said Mew-Mew.

Bow-Wow and Mew-Mew were a very young dog and cat.

They did not know how to be good. No one had told them.

They did not use kind words the one to the other.

They led a sad life, and were cross all day long.

Bow-Wow said that Mew-Mew was idle, vain, and cross, and of no use to
any one.

And Mew-Mew said of Bow-Wow, that he was only fit to bark, that he was
all for himself and ever in the way.

Thus they used to go on all day.

It was quite a treat when they fell asleep. That was the only time that
there was peace with them.




II

BOW-WOW AND MEW-MEW ARE NOT HAPPY


Bow-Wow and Mew-Mew did not love each other. But you must know that
they did not find good in any thing.

All was bad alike to them.

They did not like the house they lived in; they did not like the lady
they lived with; nor the food they had to eat.

They said they did not have what was good for them to eat or to drink.

Bow-Wow wanted other little dogs about the place, so that he could have
a good game of play.

Mew-Mew sat with her eyes half shut for hours, to think what a shame it
was no other cat ever came to see her.

"Now if I had a real home," Mew-Mew would say, "I would have a lot of
young cats in it.

I would have a fire in every room, a cup of warm milk on each floor,
and all the meat in the house should be cut up into little bits.

And I would kill Bow-Wow and all the dogs that came near my house."




III

MEW-MEW FALLS ASLEEP


Mew-Mew would think of such a life till she grew quite glad.

She would begin to purr, and so sing herself off to sleep.

"Did ever any one see such a cat?" Bow-Wow said, when Mew-Mew acted in
this way.

"She sings as if she were out of her wits.

I have seen much in my life" (he was quite young), "but I have never
seen so silly a cat as Mew-Mew is."

Then he would go to Mew-Mew and give her a blow on the side of her head
to wake her up.

Mew-Mew would spring up like a shot.

[Illustration]

And if Bow-Wow did not take to his heels with all his might, which he
very often did, Mew-Mew would use her paws in such a way as to make him
wish he had left her to have her sleep out.

Bow-Wow and Mew-Mew lived in a farm-house.

You shall hear how this dog and cat were often put out, and how much
they had to bear.




IV

THE CHICKS, THE PIGS, THE DUCKS


First, there were the chicks.

"They eat all day long," said Mew-Mew.

"I cannot bear them; I wish I might eat them."

Then there were the pigs.

Bow-Wow did not like the pigs.

For one day he had gone into their sty to bark at them. But they did
not fear him and did not try to get away.

[Illustration]

In fact, they trod on him till he was well-nigh dead.

He kept away from the pigs after that; at any rate, he did not go into
their sty again.

Then the ducks.

If there was one thing Mew-Mew did not like, it was the ducks.

The ducks made a great deal too much noise, they did not even know how
to walk, and they had a very bad way of going into the water.

The horse and the cow were much too big.

It was not safe to go near them.

They had a way of using their feet, which Bow-Wow and Mew-Mew did not
like at all.

The dog and cat had not one thing which they did like.

The lady was not quite so bad as the rest. Still she was to blame that
there were not fires in every room, cups of warm milk on every floor,
and bits of good meat in the dish.




V

BOW-WOW IS HURT


It came about one day that Bow-Wow was badly hurt.

He had gone into the barn-yard "for no harm at all," he said, but to
bark at the chicks, and put them in fear of their lives.

He had great fun with one chick, which ran away from him, and flew up
to its perch.

Bow-Wow went after it and made leaps into the air to get it, and was
just as glad as he could be.

But all at once he could jump no more.

A large log of wood fell on him. He felt great pain.

This made him cry, so that one could hear him half a mile away.

[Illustration]

The lady ran out to see why Bow-Wow cried so loud. She took the wood
off him.

Then she found that the bone of one leg was hurt.

A man was sent for to dress the leg, and Bow-Wow was put to bed.




VI

BOW-WOW IN BED


As soon as Bow-Wow was in bed, Mew-Mew came into the room.

She was as glad as she could be to see poor Bow-Wow in pain.

"Well, you are a fine sort of dog, you are," she said; "why could you
not leave the chicks alone?

It is a pity you did not break all your legs.

I wish you had done so.

Anyhow, it will be a long time before you get about again.

I shall have the nice warm fire all to myself now."

"Oh--h--h!" cried Bow-Wow, for the poor little dog felt very ill.

Then the bad Mew-Mew put up her paw and gave Bow-Wow such a blow that
it made him cry loud again with pain.

The lady came into the room to find out why the dog had called out.

Then Mew-Mew, who, to tell the truth, knew that she had not done what
was right, crept out by the open door. (See picture on page 2.)

She took care to keep out of the way for the rest of the day.

It was only when it was quite dark, and the lady had gone to bed, that
she dared to come into the room again, and take her place before the
fire.




VII

MEW-MEW BY THE FIRE


Bow-Wow was in his little bed. Great care had been taken of him.

He had not gone to sleep, for his leg hurt him so much that he could
not get to sleep at all.

When he saw Mew-Mew come into the room he was in such fear that he did
not know what to do.

She had been such a bad cat in the day, that Bow-Wow did not feel at
all sure but that now, when the lady was in bed, Mew-Mew might kill him.

It was a sad case for Bow-Wow. He shut his eyes, all but the least bit.

He kept them just far enough open, to see what Mew-Mew was doing, and
then he lay quite still.

Mew-Mew gave one look at Bow-Wow's bed.

"Bow-Wow is asleep," she said. "I will not be unkind to him again."

Then she went to the fire, and sat with her back to Bow-Wow, that he
might not see her; and she began to wash her coat.

This was such a long task that she soon forgot all about Bow-Wow.

She sat for a long time in the same place, even after the fire had gone
out.




VIII

BOW-WOW IN GREAT PAIN


Mew-Mew had a nice coat, white as milk.

She kept it very clean, for she washed it for a good many hours each
day.

Bow-Wow used to say, "Why, you will wash it all away."

Mew-Mew did not mind that a bit, for she knew that Bow-Wow only said
this when he felt vexed that he had not a nice white coat.

Bow-Wow's coat was black as coal.

Mew-Mew sat by the fire and washed her coat.

[Illustration]

Bow-Wow did not dare to go to sleep, for fear of what the cat might do.

At last he was quite worn out.

His leg was very painful, too.

After the cat had washed and washed for an hour and a half, Bow-Wow
could bear it no longer.

He turned himself in bed and gave a great groan.

Mew-Mew left off washing at once.

"I will groan again," said Bow-Wow; "I may as well, as I have done so
once."

He did groan again, and over and over again.

If he were to be killed, he could not help it, and the pain did not
seem so bad while he groaned.

"Oh! you are awake, are you?" said Mew-Mew.

"Oh--h--h! yes, I am awake," and Bow-Wow gave another great groan.




IX

MEW-MEW A NURSE


"Do you mean to make that noise all night?" said the cat, in a very
sharp way.

"I do not know. I hope not. I wish I could lose this bad pain."

"You _are_ a bad dog," said Mew-Mew.

"You have a nice warm bed to lie on; great care has been taken of you;
you have had good food to eat; what more can you want?

"Yet you lie there and groan.

"As for poor me, all I have to lie on is an old bit of rug.

I think it is I that ought to groan."

"I wish you had my leg," said Bow-Wow.

"Oh, we shall never hear the last of that leg now." Then, as she had no
more to say, she went to her rug to sleep.

But she had only slept for a little while, and had fallen into a nice
dream about a mouse, when Bow-Wow gave a great cry.

"Why do you call out in that way?" said Mew-Mew, in a rage.

"I am so hot," cried Bow-Wow, "that I think I shall die."

"I wish you were dead," said the cat.

"Why did you wake me from my first sleep and let that fat mouse get
away from me?

Am I to be kept awake all night to nurse you?"

"I only want you to take the rug off me," said Bow-Wow.

"Oh, dear! dear!" cried Mew-Mew.

[Illustration]

But she took off the rug, and put it near the fire.

It would make her a nice soft bed. The rug she had was not so good and
soft as this.




X

BOW-WOW FEELS VERY ILL


"Well, will that do?" said Mew-Mew.

"Oh, I do not know; I am very ill."

"I dare say you are not a bit worse than I am; you have not a bad cold
as I have."

"A bad cold! What is a bad cold to a leg as full of pain as mine is?"

"Oh! there you are! all about the leg again!"

Mew-Mew went off to her rug, and was soon fast asleep.

She slept this time for a good long while, and Bow-Wow slept too; but
as break of day came, Bow-Wow made a very loud cry.

"Dear me! dear me! what is it now?" said Mew-Mew.

"I cannot bear this great pain any longer. You must come and help me
with my bad leg."

"Anything for peace," said Mew-Mew, and up she came and bit through
what was on the leg and took it off.

"Well, are you all right now?"

"I am better," said Bow-Wow. But he lay back, for he could not hold up
his head.

[Illustration]

"You do not look to me as if you would live," said the cat, after she
had had a long look at him.

"Not look as if I should live?" said Bow-Wow.

"No, I do not think you will live;" and with that, she sat down before
the dog, with her eyes fixed on his face, as if she meant to wait there
and see the end of him.




XI

WILL BOW-WOW DIE?


"Is there anything I can do?" asked the dog.

"Oh! I do not know of anything. You must just wait."

Then Mew-Mew shut her eyes for a little more sleep.

"But Mew-Mew! Mew-Mew!" cried poor Bow-Wow, "you must not go to sleep.

Oh, Mew-Mew! I have no one to speak to but you."

"It will not help you to speak," said Mew-Mew.

"You are much too fond of your own voice; I have told you that over and
over again."

"Yes, Mew-Mew, so you have. But you would not have me die, would you?

I have so many things I should like to say to you.

What will you do without me when I am gone?"

The poor little dog gave such a sad look into Mew-Mew's face, as he
spoke these words, that Mew-Mew did not quite know what to say.

To tell the truth, though she tried to think that she was very glad at
getting rid of Bow-Wow for good and all, yet she was not quite sure
about it.

After all, she did not know what she should do without him.

But she did not wish to show that she was so weak as to care for him;
so when he asked "What will you do when I am gone?" she said:

"Oh! I shall do much as I do now."

And she began to wash a speck off one of her white paws.




XII

BOW-WOW AND MEW-MEW BECOME FRIENDS


But poor little Bow-Wow could not bear this.

"What!" he said, "you will go on as you do now when I am gone?

You will go on just the same, when you will never have me to look
at--or to speak to--or to fight with?"

Bow-Wow's voice quite broke down. "Oh, Mew-Mew! you _are_ not kind to
me."

"Me not kind! If it comes to that, you are much more unkind than I am.

You do not care a bit for me; not a bit more than if I was a chick or a
pig.

You would not sit up with _me_, as I am doing with you now--no, not if
I had hurt ten legs," said Mew-Mew.

"Oh, Mew-Mew! how can you say such things?" cried Bow-Wow. "Oh,
Mew-Mew! how _can_ you, and with me dying!"

[Illustration]

"You would not care if _I_ were dying ten times over," said the cat.
And she put her paw over her face, and began to cry.

"I--I--I should," said Bow-Wow; "I am sure I should care very much."

"Well, well," said Mew-Mew, "I do not wish to be cross with you, now
that you are about to die."

"Let us be friends then," said Bow-Wow.

"We will," said Mew-Mew.

Then they were quite still for some time. They did not know what to
make of being friends.

They did not speak, for they did not know what to say.




XIII

MEW-MEW SEEKS SOME FOOD


Mew-Mew was the first to speak.

"How are you now, Bow-Wow?" she said.

"How do I look?" said the dog.

"Ah! not very well. There is a look in your eyes I do not like."

"Oh, if it is only my eyes," said Bow-Wow, "I can change that.... Look
at me now, Mew-Mew."

"That is not the same look at all," said the cat. "Your eyes are as
bright as mine now, Bow-Wow."

"No, no--not so bright as yours. No other eyes could be as bright as
yours, Mew-Mew.

But I do feel a good deal better now, and I think, dear Mew-Mew, that
if I could get a long sleep and some nice food--"

"Should you like a mouse?" cried Mew-Mew.

"Ah! I fear a mouse would get away from me.

I do not know how to deal with a mouse as you do, Mew-Mew, even when I
am well.

I should like some cold meat."

"Well, I will see what I can do," said Mew-Mew.

Away she went; but the only food that she could find was some cold
pork.

[Illustration]

She had two or three bites at this, to make sure it was good, and then
went back to Bow-Wow with her prize.

"What is it, Mew-Mew?"

"Cold pork: very nice." And she put it before him.

"Please have some too, Mew-Mew."

"Well, I do not care if I do," said the cat.




XIV

BOW-WOW DOES NOT DIE


They both set to work with a good will. In a very short time the cold
pork was all gone.

"It was very good," said Bow-Wow, with a sigh.

"It has done me a great deal of good. Is there any more of it?"

"Not a bit more," said Mew-Mew.

"Well, it cannot be helped. Shall I try now to go to sleep?"

"Yes, do, and I will make up your bed for you."

This she did, and the dog lay down and shut his eyes.

"I will just give my coat a wash, and then try to go to sleep too,"
said Mew-Mew.

"Be sure you call me if you feel worse, dear Bow-Wow."

The little boys and girls who read this book will be glad to know that
in spite of all the fright which Bow-Wow and Mew-Mew had, the dog was
in no danger of dying at all.

He had to stay in bed for a whole week, and for ten days more was very
weak, and had to take care what he ate, and where he went.

[Illustration]

Yet by the end of a month he was as strong as ever, and would bark at
the pigs and hunt the chicks just as he had done before.




XV

BOW-WOW AND MEW-MEW ARE VERY GREAT FRIENDS


Bow-Wow and Mew-Mew were now great friends.

Mew-Mew said that she had saved Bow-Wow's life when he was ill.

She said this so often, that Bow-Wow came to think it was true, and
looked upon her as the best friend he had in the world.

As for Mew-Mew, she grew very fond of Bow-Wow; she did not like to have
him out of her sight.

They loved each other so much that if you had told them they were once
cross and unkind they would have said:

"Oh, no! that must have been some other dog and cat, it could not have
been we."

But though they were now such good friends, they did not like the rest
of the world a bit more than they had done before.

One night, after the lady had gone to bed, Bow-Wow and Mew-Mew met to
have a talk before the fire.

Bow-Wow was very sad.

"Why are you so sad, Bow-Wow?" said Mew-Mew.

"It is the pigs!"

"What have they been doing?"

"I heard them grunt as I came past the sty!"

[Illustration]

"But they did you no harm, did they?"

"They would have done if they could."




XVI

BOW-WOW AND MEW-MEW WILL GO AWAY


"Well, pigs are no good anywhere, I own," said Mew-Mew, "but do you
know, when I come to think of it, I am not sure but that chicks are
worse."

"Chicks are bad, if you like, but not so bad as pigs.

You may be right, yet I do not know but that out of the whole set,
ducks are the very worst of all," said Bow-Wow.

And then he began to groan.

As soon as he gave a groan Mew-Mew gave one too, and they kept on for
some time.

"I have a good mind not to bear it," said Bow-Wow at last.

"Dear me! you must bear it, how can you help it?"

"I can go away."

"Where to?"

"Anywhere."

Mew-Mew was so put out with the thought of Bow-Wow going away, that
for a time she could not speak.

At last she said, "Oh, Bow-Wow, you would not leave me, would you?"

"Would you not come with me?" he asked.

"Yes, that I would, anywhere, to the end of the world."

"Then we will go," said Bow-Wow. "It must be a good change, that is
clear; in no place can we be as badly off as we are here."

"Yes, that is quite clear," said the cat. "When shall we set off?"

"Now, at once," said Bow-Wow.




XVII

SHALL THEY START SO SOON?


"But we cannot get out yet; the doors are not open."

To tell the truth, Mew-Mew did not care about getting away, as Bow-Wow
did.

She liked to stay at home.

And on this night she felt that she must have a long sleep.

So she said, "We must not start yet, for I have not given my coat a
good wash."

"Cannot you live one night without giving your coat a wash?" said
Bow-Wow, in a rage.

"I should think not. Would you have me to go out into the world with
dust and dirt on my coat?

And before we set out, I should like to get a thing or two that we may
want to take with us.

Let us have a sound sleep to-night. We may hope then to start in good
time."

"Well, well, as you please," said Bow-Wow, who now felt glad, too, that
they had not to leave their warm place by the fire just then.

[Illustration]

They lay down side by side on the rug, and went to sleep.




XVIII

SAYING "GOOD-BY"


Next day Bow-Wow went for a walk round the farm.

First he had a look at the pigs; he did not go into their sty, but he
barked at them and said:

"I am sad for you, that you can never get out for a walk, but must be
ever in that sty. Do you not wish you had been born dogs?"

And the pigs, with a grunt, said: "Go away, you little dog; we do not
wish to talk to you. Our home is a very nice one; we do not want to
make any change."

He gave a bark at the chicks, not so much to harm them as to bid them
good-by.

[Illustration]

He went to the pond to get a drink and to say as his last words to the
ducks:

"Why do you not be wise and stay on the land? You can come to no harm
here, but I am sure you will take cold by being so much in the water,
and that may be the death of you!"

But the ducks said: "Quack! quack! run off, you bad dog. You do not at
all know what is good for us."




XIX

BOW-WOW AND MEW-MEW SET OFF


In the night Mew-Mew had made her coat quite white.

She stole a roast chick out of the house, and hid it in the dust-bin.

And she took one or two other things which they might want.

They did not start till the lady had given them two meals that day.

At the set time they met at the dust-bin.

[Illustration]

"But who was to carry the chick?"

Bow-Wow said he could not, Mew-Mew said the same.

Then said Bow-Wow: "Had we better not eat it now? It is no use to leave
it here."

They set to work, and ate the chick to the very last bone.

Then they did not feel quite so fit to take a long walk as they had
hoped.

Still they made their way to the gate of the farm and out into the road.

"Now we have done it," said Bow-Wow.

"Yes, we have done it," said Mew-Mew who did not feel at all gay.

"We must step out as fast as we can," said Bow-Wow, "for I dare say
they will be after us in half an hour."

[Illustration]

"Oh! as fast as you please," said Mew-Mew; but she wished all the time
that she was back on her rug before the fire.

So they set off at full speed.




XX

RUNNING AWAY


They left the farm by the gate and got on the road.

Bow-Wow wished to run very fast, for "I dare say they will be after us
in half an hour," he said.

He did not think but that they would soon be missed, though he said,
"No one has ever given us much care."

"Our loss," he said, "will make the lady sad and she will send out the
men to find us."

Bow-Wow and Mew-Mew ran fast, so fast that the cat was soon out of
breath.

Mew-Mew could run fast for a little way, but she was not used to long
races.

She had not gone half a mile before she began to feel quite ill.




XXI

IS IT GOOD FUN?


"It is fine fun, is it not, Mew-Mew?" Bow-Wow called out in great joy.

He had often run a long race and did not mind this run a bit.

"Yes, it is fine fun," said Mew-Mew, two or three times.

But at last, when for about the tenth time Bow-Wow said, "Is it not
fine fun?" Mew-Mew could only gasp out:--

"Yes--yes--it is--good fun--but--can we not--just--rest a little?"

[Illustration]

"What! rest so soon?" said Bow-Wow.

"Yes--just--for--a little time."

"Oh, well, if you wish it," and Bow-Wow stood still.

"But what is the matter with you? Have you hurt one of your paws?"

"Oh no--not that," said Mew-Mew. "We have run so fast that I have lost
my breath."

"That is sad," said Bow-Wow. "I do not know how you will be able to
move about much in the world, if you so soon lose your breath."

"But we are not to be ever on the run, are we?" said Mew-Mew, with a
wild look in her eyes.

"Well, no, not ever on the run.

But there will be a good deal of it. We must do the best we can."




XXII

IN THE FIELDS


"Have you had a rest now, Mew-Mew?" said Bow-Wow.

"Oh yes," said the cat, as she got on her legs again. "We will not go
quite so fast now, will we?"

"As you please. If the men from the farm come after us, and take us
back, it will not be I that am to blame."

They set off once more.

They did not keep to the road, for fear of those who might be on the
lookout for them.

Some fields were much more easy to cross than others. The best of all
were those of nice soft short grass.

The fields in which the corn had been cut, were very hard to get over.
The short stems of the corn were sharp to their paws.

[Illustration]

The field of large green leaves was not so bad to cross.

Still it was not nice to be out of sight the whole time, and only to
know where the other was by calling out every now and then.

They could not run so fast as on the road, and though they did stop
many times to rest, it was hard work for Mew-Mew.

She was short of breath, as you know. But, worse than that, her paws
had become so large that she could only just get along.

"Oh, dear me!" she said, "what can have made my paws swell in this way,
and what makes them so full of pain?"




XXIII

PUSS FALLS LAME


Mew-Mew went on but a little way. She then could not even limp along
any more.

"Well, I did think you could run better than this," said Bow-Wow, not
in a very sweet temper, when he saw her lie down.

"Oh, I shall be well soon," the cat said, "it is only my paws. Oh,
Bow-Wow, do your paws never hurt?"

"I should think not," said Bow-Wow.

"Well, but just look at mine."

And they did look odd, for they were as big again as they ought to be,
and quite black.

"Have you some thorns in them?" asked Bow-Wow. "You must put them into
water and wash them."

"Put my paws in water! I would not do such a thing for the world."

"What will you do with them, then?"

"I mean to lick them."

"It will take you a long time to lick those paws white. But if you mean
to do it you had better begin, for we shall not walk any more to-night.

Let us creep under this corn in the field. You will not mind if I go
to sleep, will you, Mew-Mew?"

"Oh dear, no," said the cat.




XXIV

IN THE CORN-FIELD


"I should like some food before I go to sleep," Bow-Wow said to
himself. "I do not at all know where to get any.

I must go without my supper for once."

This he did, and was soon fast asleep.

As for poor Mew-Mew, she had two hours' good work, before she could
get rid of the pain in her paws, and make them look white, as they did
before she set out.

Then she made herself into a ball, and slept well till the sun was up.

I dare say she would have slept half the next day, had not Bow-Wow
called,--

"Up! up! wake up, Mew-Mew!"

Mew-Mew did her best to get up, and to keep her eyes open.

She had never had such a day as the last.

"No time to lose!" said Bow-Wow. "We must have some food!"

"Oh, yes," said Mew-Mew, "we will have some birds. Wait till I have
washed--".

"Till I have washed my coat," she was going to say, but before she had
got the last words out, she heard such a noise, all at once, in the
trees near, that it quite put them out of her head.

She looked up to see the cause of it, and then cried:--

"Oh! look at the birds! Oh! dear me! Bow-Wow! look at the birds!

Oh! look at them! look at them!"

[Illustration]




XXV

THE FIRST MEAL


She had never seen so many birds, at one time, in her life before.

"Well, I see them," said Bow-Wow. "Why do you not go and get some, and
not talk so much about them?"

The truth was that Bow-Wow did not much care to hear about birds.

Mew-Mew had but to lie in wait for them and she could get nice tid-bits
for herself.

But Bow-Wow might look and wait, and as soon as he made a jump, the
bird was sure to fly away.

The sight of Mew-Mew's little feasts had of old been more than Bow-Wow
was able to bear.

[Illustration]

"Why do you not get some?" said Bow-Wow.

"Oh! I will get them," said Mew-Mew, "all alive."

And she lost no time about it, for she had two poor little birds in no
time.

Bow-Wow ate one, she ate the other.

"Will you have one more?" said Mew-Mew.

"Yes, if you please," said the dog.

Mew-Mew could get these birds with great ease.

They had three birds each, and then as they could eat no more, they lay
down again for a time.

"It is very warm," said Mew-Mew. "I wish I had a little milk."




XXVI

THE WORK OF EACH RUNAWAY


"Milk! Oh, you will get no milk here," said Bow-Wow.

"Get no milk!" said the cat.

"There is no milk," said the dog, "but you can have water."

"I would not take a drop of water to save my life," said Mew-Mew.

"Well, well," said Bow-Wow, seeing that all the hair on her back was
on end, "we will hope to find some milk as we go along.

But I want to speak to you. I think, dear Mew-Mew, that as you can get
birds so well,--you know how they fly away from me,--I cannot do better
than leave you to find our food each day."

"I am sure, if I can please you," said Mew-Mew, "I shall only be too
glad to do so."

"Very well," said Bow-Wow. "I will pick out our road and say when we
shall rest, and where we shall sleep; and you can come to me at any
time that you want help."

"I will," said Mew-Mew.

"And now let us set off," said Bow-Wow.

"Yes," said Mew-Mew. "I hope we shall find some milk as we go on."

They went on for a long way, through the fields and woods, and kept out
of the way of men and boys.




XXVII

THE BIG SHEEP-DOG


At last, at a time when they had not looked well ahead, they heard a
loud bark, and saw a great sheep-dog racing after them, as if he would
break his neck.

"Oh!" cried Bow-Wow.

"Oh--h!" cried Mew-Mew.

They did not know what to do.

"We must run up a tree," said the cat.

"But I cannot run up a tree," said the dog.

"I am sure I cannot help you," cried Mew-Mew, and she ran with all her
might.

[Illustration]

There was a large tree close by; Mew-Mew flew up it, and was quite
safe.

What would poor Bow-Wow do?

The great dog came up. He did not give Bow-Wow time to speak, but fell
on him, and began to roll him over and over on the hard ground.

"Oh, Mew-Mew! Mew-Mew!" cried he, calling upon the only friend he had.

"What do you mean by 'Mew-Mew'?" said the big dog.

And he laid hold of Bow-Wow's neck, and gave him such a shake, as if he
would shake his life out of him.

Mew-Mew, up in the tree, you may be sure, sat as still as a mouse.

"Oh! let me go! and I will never--never--" cried Bow-Wow, with his
voice getting fainter at each word.

The big dog had such a hold of Bow-Wow, that he was not able to say
what it was that he would never do.

"It is all over with me," he said to himself; and he shut his eyes and
gave himself up for lost.




XXVIII

BOW-WOW IS BADLY HURT


Just then a loud call was heard.

"Come off, Rex! Do you hear? Come off, lad!"

The big dog just lifted his head at the sound, and so gave Bow-Wow time
to get his breath, but he kept him fast on the ground.

"Come off, you bad dog!" said the man again.

It was not till he had called a good many times, that the big dog gave
poor Bow-Wow a last shake, and then ran off to the man.

As soon as he was quite gone, Bow-Wow, who had not dared open his lips
before, began to groan with all his might.

"Oh!" he said. "Oh! oh!"

They were such sad groans, that they made Mew-Mew's heart, as she sat
in the tree, quite come into her mouth.

"What shall I do? Shall I come down, Bow-Wow?" she said.

But Bow-Wow would not hear her, and only groaned more and more.

"Oh, dear! dear! I do think he is dying," cried Mew-Mew; and she came
down from the tree, though she could but just stand for fear.

"Bow-Wow! can you speak?" she called out, as soon as she was down.

"Do not come near me," said the little dog, in a low voice.




XXIX

PUSS TURNS NURSE


Mew-Mew gave a look all round, and as the sheep-dog was nowhere in
sight, she came to where Bow-Wow lay.

"Go away! leave me!" said Bow-Wow.

"Leave you! Never!" cried the cat. "Oh! my poor dear, dear Bow-Wow!
Why, you are badly hurt!"

"If I am badly hurt you are quite safe, at any rate," said Bow-Wow.

"You run away, and leave your friend to get badly hurt, do you not?"

"Ah! but is it not a good thing that I did run away?

Who would nurse you now if I were hurt too?"

There was something in that, so Bow-Wow said no more about it.

Mew-Mew began to run over the things she could do for Bow-Wow: how she
would put him to bed, get him some drink, and kill a bird for him.

Bow-Wow said he would like some food, and that if he had a very fine
bird, he would try to eat some of it.

[Illustration]

Mew-Mew went off to find a fine bird.

But go where she would, up and down, not a bird could she get.

The land just there had few trees. There did not seem to be a bird in
the place.




XXX

CROSS WORDS


She ran up the trees, she hid in the wheat, yet she saw but six birds
in an hour, and these all got away.

She went back to Bow-Wow with a sad face.

"You have come back at last," Bow-Wow said as soon as he saw her.
"Come! make haste. Where are the birds?"

"Oh, Bow-Wow, I cannot find any."

"You cannot find any birds?"

"Not one! It is the worst place I ever was in," and she began to sob as
if her heart would break.

"You ought to have done better," said Bow-Wow.

"It is your work to find food. I told you so."

"And it is your part to take care of us on the way, and you have done
that well, have you not?" said Mew-Mew.

"You have not much to talk about, anyhow," said Bow-Wow.

"If I have not, I might have had, for all your good lookout," said the
cat.

Thus they grew very cross.

I dare say they might even have come to blows, if it had not been that
Bow-Wow was not able to stand.

After a while they made up their cross words.

[Illustration]

As poor Bow-Wow felt ill, they could not go on.

No food was to be had.

They lay down just in that place, each rolled into a tight ball, and
soon fell asleep.




XXXI

HOW THE RUNAWAYS FARED


They slept the rest of that day.

In the night rain began to fall. This made them wake up.

Bow-Wow was just able to walk to a tree, the same tree that Mew-Mew had
used to hide in. The rain did not come so hard, close up to the trunk
of the tree.

It would take too long to tell you of all this little dog and cat had
to bear, for many days.

Often without food, in the wind and the rain, and on the cold ground at
night, what a change after the good home they had left!

Day by day they grew more thin and weak.

Bow-Wow's black coat was all rusty and dusty; his bones looked as if
they must come through his skin.

As for Mew-Mew's fur, you would not think it ever could have been white
at all, it was in such a sad state.

[Illustration]

She used to wash her paws, and her face, two or three times a day; she
would have done more if she could.

Once they went near a house, in the hope that some food might be given
them, but some bad boys cast stones at them, and drove them away.

They had to run for their lives.




XXXII

KIND FRIENDS


One night, after they had had no food all day, they saw a little boy
and girl on the road, and the boy and girl saw them.

They did not run away at the sight of a dog, as some boys and girls
would have done.

[Illustration]

When they saw how thin and poor the dog and cat were, they took out of
their bag some bread, which they had left from dinner, and fed them.

Bow-Wow and Mew-Mew were very glad to have the food, and would have
gone home with their young friends.

But the boy said, "No, you must not come home with us. We do not know
you.

We have a big dog in the yard at home. Rex would kill you, if you came
to our house."




XXXIII

BAD BLOWS


The one thing in their minds now was, how to get home once more.

They could never agree who was most to blame that they had run away.

Mew-Mew said that all the blame lay with Bow-Wow; and Bow-Wow said that
Mew-Mew was quite as much to blame as he was, and more so.

Mew-Mew could not bear this.

Weak as she was, she made a spring at Bow-Wow, and gave him such a box
on the ears, that he, being very weak too, fell right down.

[Illustration]

When he got on his legs again, he flew at Mew-Mew.

One might think they would have killed each other on the spot; but they
were not so strong as they had been, and could not fight long.

After they could fight no more, they would not speak a word for half an
hour.

Then Mew-Mew, with her kind heart, said, "I am sure I did not mean to
hurt you, Bow-Wow!"

And Bow-Wow said, "Let us not think or say any more about it.

It is very sad that we cannot live without cross words and bad blows.

But what are we to do? How are we to live?"

"I wish we were dead," said Mew-Mew.

"We soon shall be," said Bow-Wow.

"But why did we ever, ever run away?" asked Mew-Mew.




XXXIV

THOUGHTS OF HOME


Mew-Mew had asked this a good many times before and Bow-Wow had said,
"We did it for the best."

To-day he only gave a great groan.

"We had such a good home!" said Mew-Mew.

"We had!" said Bow-Wow.

"There was food for us at all times."

"There was!"

"We had a fire all the year round to keep us warm."

"It got too warm sometimes."

"It never was too warm for me."

"There were the chicks in the yard, that we did not like."

"Yes, and the pigs."

"And the ducks, and the horse, and the cow. Yet they did us no harm."

"Well, no! I cannot say they did; that is, if we left them alone."

Bow-Wow did not forget how the pigs trod on him in the sty.

Mew-Mew went on: "But we gave up our good home, we left the lady who
was so kind to us, and here we are with no food, cold, and wet, and
nearly dead. Oh! Bow-Wow."

"Oh! Mew-Mew!"

They each had as sad a face as you ever saw in your life.

"We may get home yet," said the dog.

"Ah, if we could!" said the cat.




XXXV

WHERE WAS HOME?


In what way did home lie? They had gone now to the right hand, now to
the left hand, now to the north, now to the south.

How to find the way by which they had come first, they could not tell.

They could but walk on, and on, and on; and their poor little weak legs
felt many a pain.

"We can but go on till we die, Bow-Wow," said Mew-Mew.

They went on, and never knew the least bit in the world where they were
going.

Sometimes when the sun rose, they had not the heart to get up at all.

They would lie still, with their eyes shut, and try to sleep as long
as they could, that they might not think of their pains.

[Illustration]

When they had gone long with no food, they could not sleep, but would
creep close to each other, or would sit and look at each other in a
kind of fear.




XXXVI

PUSS FALLS ILL


At last one night came, when poor little Mew-Mew lay quite flat on the
ground, and put out her four paws.

She said in a very quiet way, "I can walk no more.

When the day comes, you must say good-by to me and go on alone."

"Oh! Mew-Mew," cried Bow-Wow, and he went to her side and sat down.

The tears came into his eyes so fast that he could not see.

"I will stay here if you must stay, Mew-Mew," said Bow-Wow. "I will
stay here and die too."

"Oh, no, dear Bow-Wow; you may get home yet."

"What good would it do me to get home alone?"

"You could tell the lady how hard we tried to get home.

I should like to have her know how hard we tried, and how sorry we
were."

"But she will never know it," said Bow-Wow. "I shall never find her. I
cannot go on alone. I will not leave you."




XXXVII

THE OLD FARM-HOUSE


They lay down to sleep. It was a dark cold night. They crept close,
that they might not feel the cold so much.

Bow-Wow could not sleep: he thought every hour would be Mew-Mew's last.

But the hours passed on, and she still drew her breath in the same
short way.

She was alive when the sun rose.

It had been night when they had come to this place--quite dark.

When the light came, what do you think Bow-Wow saw?

As soon as his eyes were open, and this was just as the birds began to
sing, he saw, not far off, the farm-house at home.

[Illustration]

There it was; and the sun shone on the warm tile roof, and on the old
stone walls.

There it was, with the barn-yard and the stacks of hay.

Bow-Wow knew them every one.

He gave one long look, and then such a bark, that even made poor sick
Mew-Mew wake.




XXXVIII

HOME


"Oh, Bow-Wow, what is it?" she said.

But Bow-Wow could not tell.

Not a word would come from him save one.

He ran round and round as if he were wild.

"HOME! HOME! HOME!" he cried.

Yes, it was home at last.

Mew-Mew could see it. There it was, the red house lit up by the sun.

But poor Mew-Mew could not walk to it.

[Illustration]

Bow-Wow ran off to the house, and in some way or other, as dogs often
will, made one of the men come to the place where Mew-Mew lay.

He took Mew-Mew in his arms, to her long-lost home.




XXXIX

TELL US MORE


But some little boy or girl will say, "Tell us more.

Tell me,--did Mew-Mew die?

Did the lady take Bow-Wow and Mew-Mew into the house again?

What did she do for them, if she took them in?

Did puss ever get her white coat again?

And if they both got quite well again, were they good or bad
afterward?"

I will tell you.

The lady was very glad to see her pets home once more.

They were in such a sad way that she did not whip them.

[Illustration]

She gave Mew-Mew a cup of warm milk before the fire.

Bow-Wow had a great lump of meat with no bone.

Then each of them had a warm bath, and Mew-Mew was put to bed.

As to Mew-Mew's coat, she washed it so often, and took such care of it,
that in a few weeks it grew long and was quite white again.

And I am glad to be able to add, that Bow-Wow and Mew-Mew were as good
a little dog and cat ever after, as you and I could wish them to be.




ABOUT THE BOOK


Bow-Wow and Mew-Mew is one of the few books for beginners in reading
that may be classed as literature. Written in words of mostly one
syllable, it has a story to tell, which is related in so attractive a
manner as to immediately win the favor of young children. It teaches
English and English literature to the child in the natural way: through
a love for the reading matter. It is the character of story that will,
in the not distant future, replace the ordinary primer or reader
with detached sentences, and which seldom possesses any relation to
literature.

The ultimate objects of any story can only be effected through the
_love_ for a story. The prominent point in this story is development
of good character, which may well be regarded as the highest purpose
of education. The transformation from bad to good traits in the dog
and cat cannot but have a desirable effect on every child that reads
the story. Bow-Wow and Mew-Mew become dissatisfied with their home and
their surroundings, and ungrateful toward their benefactress. As the
story tells, "They did not find good in any thing." But after running
away and suffering hunger, neglect, and bad treatment, their characters
begin to change. They naturally come to reflect their mistress's
goodness. They learn the value of companionship and friendship, and
the appreciation of a home. However, the ethical thoughts in the story
are presented without a moral. The child really _lives_ the scenes
described. He has the emotions of the characters and feels their
convictions. And this determines the worth of a story as an agent in
character development.

The narrative furnishes, further, the proper kind of exercise for
the imagination. It affords abundant opportunity for the play of the
dramatic instinct in the child, and effects a happy union of the "home
world" and the "school world." The illustrations, drawn by Miss Hodge,
have been planned and executed with considerable care.

                                                      J. C. S.




GOOD BOOKS FOR CHILDREN'S READING

For children from five to ten years


=Nonsense Rhymes and Animal Stories.= By Alhambra G. Deming.

Charming little rhymes and stories, incidentally teaching habits of
good English to the little folks. 64 pages, with 35 illustrations in
black and color. _Cloth, 65 cents._

=The Teenie Weenies.= By William Donahey and Effie E. Baker.

The adventures of these strange tiny folks are related in a manner that
is delightfully simple and realistic, and which will be found to appeal
to the child's sense of humor. 141 pages, with 72 illustrations in
colors and decorated end sheets. _Cloth, 70 cents._

=Two Indian Children of Long Ago.= By Frances Lillian Taylor.

A collection of beautiful Indian legends, giving an intimate picture of
Indian child life. 160 pages, with 40 illustrations in black and color.
_Cloth, 70 cents._

=Nixie Bunny in Manners-Land.=. By Joseph C. Sindelar.

This is the first of the popular NIXIE BUNNY BOOKS which have been read
wherever there are children. It is a rabbit story of good manners.
144 pages, with 62 illustrations in colors and decorated end sheets.
_Cloth, 70 cents._


The other books in the same series are:

=Nixie Bunny in Workaday-Land=

A rabbit story of the occupations and industry. 144 pages, with 90
illustrations in colors and decorated end sheets. _Cloth, 70 cents._

=Nixie Bunny in Holiday-Land=

A rabbit story of the holidays. 159 pages, with 82 illustrations in
colors and decorated end sheets. _Cloth, 70 cents._

=Nixie Bunny in Faraway-Lands=

A rabbit story of strange little folk. 160 pages, with 94 illustrations
in colors and decorated end sheets. _Cloth, 70 cents._


BECKLEY-CARDY COMPANY _Publishers_ CHICAGO





End of Project Gutenberg's Bow-Wow and Mew-Mew, by Georgiana M. Craik

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOW-WOW AND MEW-MEW ***

***** This file should be named 44914.txt or 44914.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/4/9/1/44914/

Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
