The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari, Volume 108,
February 16, 1895, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Punch, or the London Charivari, Volume 108, February 16, 1895

Author: Various

Editor: Sir Francis Burnand

Release Date: March 9, 2014 [EBook #45089]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH, CHARIVARI, FEBRUARY 16, 1895 ***




Produced by Punch, or the London Charivari, Lisa Tang,
Malcolm Farmer and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net





PUNCH, OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI

Volume 108, February 16th, 1895.

_edited by Sir Francis Burnand_




THE NON-CAPITALIST'S VADE MECUM.

_Question._ Having no cash you wish to make a living. Kindly tell me
the objections to sweeping a crossing?

_Answer._ A small sum of money would be necessary to purchase a
broom--a preliminary step that could not be surmounted.

_Q._ Quite so. And would a like difficulty arise to prevent you
selling lucifers?

_A._ Certainly, for matches suitable for street hawking cannot be
obtained on credit.

_Q._ Would a clerkship be within your reach?

_A._ Scarcely, as a new suit, or a nearly new suit of clothes would be
requisite to give one the air of respectability necessary for securing
an audience with an employer.

_Q._ Could you not become a company promoter?

_A._ Not with safety, now that the winding-up business is
superintended by a judge capable of understanding the intricacies of
city finance.

_Q._ Is there any opening for you as a cab-driver?

_A._ No, as a license cannot be obtained for love, but must be bought
with money.

_Q._ Surely you have a chance as a slave to journalism?

_A._ Writing for the press is at all times precarious, and is,
moreover, a calling which cannot be followed without a small but
impossible expenditure on pens, ink. and paper.

_Q._ Has not life sometimes been supported by the successful attempts
to borrow from one's friends?

_A._ Yes, but this financial condition will have been enjoyed and
abandoned before one can truthfully style oneself an ex-capitalist.

_Q._ The sale of information of an interesting character to those
concerned has sometimes--has it not--been found of a profitable
nature?

_A._ Occasionally, but this again is not only an unpleasant but a
dangerous operation, and if resisted, may end with an entirely
embarrassing prosecution at the Old Bailey.

_Q._ Then having no cash, no credit, and no references, what career is
open to you?

_A._ But one--to become the responsible manager of a theatrical
company touring in the provinces.

       *       *       *       *       *

"TEMPORA MUTANTUR."--In these days of very late dining hours a
performance at 5 P.M., if over at 7, or 7.15 at latest, ought to suit
those whose daily work is over about 4 or 4.30, and who dislike
"turning out" after dinner if they are at home, and who cannot get
away from any dinner party if they are out in time to see even half of
the entertainment. The _matinee_ at two is a very difficult time, as
it clashes with lunch; but as tea can be taken in the _entr'actes_,
five o'clock seems a very reasonable hour, that is, if the show be
over at 7.15, and the dinner hour be 8 or 8.15.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: TRUE DIGNITY.

_Barbara._ "OH, MOTHER DEAR, I'VE GOT SUCH A PAIN!"

_Mother._ "HAVE YOU, DARLING? WHERE?"

_Barbara._ "IN THE PROPER PLACE, OF COURSE!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

HINTS TO SKATERS ON ETIQUETTE AND DEPORTMENT.

Do not venture on the ice until you can skate properly. Practice the
various steps and evolutions before a looking-glass in your bed-room.

There is a great art in falling gracefully, and it is surprising what
a number of interesting, complicated, and unlooked-for attitudes and
figures can be thus developed. To ensure perfect confidence at the
critical moment, it is as well to hire somebody, say a professional
wrestler or prize-fighter, to trip you up and knock you down in all
the possible methods. A mattress may be used for beginners to fall on.
The more improbable your manner of tumbling, the greater success will
you achieve in the eyes of the on-lookers.

When skating with a lady, you may cross hands, but it is unusual for
you to put your arm round her waist. This is only done in great
emergencies, or in a thick fog, or when you have the pond to
yourselves. It is generally found that this proceeding is equivalent
to skating on very thin ice, and will lead to dangerous consequences.

If, however, a lady, who evidently has not complete control of
herself, and does not readily answer her helm, steers straight into
your arms, you should accept the situation in your best ball-room
manner. Do not attempt to avoid a collision, as if you dodge suddenly,
the lady, on failing to meet your support, will probably sit down
abruptly on the ice, or get entangled with a sweeper.

Should you, owing to any unforeseen circumstance, find yourself
prostrated at a young lady's feet, do not place your hand on your
heart and say she is the only girl you ever loved. These little scenes
are apt to collect a crowd. Merely say you stopped to examine the
thickness of the ice, or any little _plaisanterie_ you feel capable of
inventing. Then retire to a discreet distance and rub yourself.

If the ice gives way, and you find yourself in the water, get out as
speedily as possible. I do not advise drowning. It is always a wet and
uncomfortable process, and has very few recommendations. It is,
moreover, quite fatal to true enjoyment, and only those who are
morbidly anxious for a "par" in the papers will habitually resort to
this mode of creating a sensation.

Do not hit people much with any stick you may think it _de rigueur_ to
brandish about. Such personal attentions are best performed when you
and a string of ten or twelve other 'Arries are banded together. You
can then stand up without fear for the rights of the high-spirited
young citizen to enjoy himself.

There is nothing that figure-skaters so much appreciate as the sudden
inroad of hockey-players in their midst. It adds immensely to their
zest to feel they are liable to be knocked over in the middle of an
exciting "rocker" or "mohawk"; and, of course, they like their
combined figures to be nicely disarranged, as it enables them to show
their skill in sorting themselves again. Hockey should therefore be
indulged in anywhere and everywhere.

Lastly, if you prefer sliding to skating, do not slide in a top-hat
and frock-coat, unless you are a member of the Skating Club, and even
then it looks ostentatious. Dress appropriately in some quiet costume
of kickseys and pearlies, with a feather in your hat. Wear your
billycock at the back of your head, as it will break your falls.
Always shout at the top of your voice.

       *       *       *       *       *

A PLEA FOR THE GHOSTS.

  Once we dreamed of a magical clime,
    Powerful fairies lived there then,
  Ready to change, in the shortest time,
    Men to fishes, or fish to men;
  Science, alas, assails the land,
    Down the magical palaces fall,
  Fairies and elves, we understand,
    Never could really exist at all.

  Still remain to us spectres strange,
    Headless horsemen and monks severe,
  Some that arrive each night in the Grange,
    Others (like Christmas) once a year;
  Yet they linger, a fearful joy,
    Elderly relics of childhood's day.
  Now our "scientists" would destroy
    All their humorous, mild array!

  Mr. MASKELYNE, learned man!
    Scoff at Theosophists as you will,
  Spot each fraudulent gambler's plan,
    Only allow us our Bogies still!
  Little we value prosaic truth,
    If it must scatter these shadowy hosts;
  Spare us a single belief of youth,
    Leave us, ah, leave us at least our Ghosts!

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: GOING TO THE DOGS.

_Candid Vet_ (_who has been called in to look at Mr. Noodle's new
purchase, which is somehow amiss_). "AH, YER WANT TO KNOW WHAT TO DO
WITH 'IM? WELL NOW, HE'S BEEN GOIN' PRETTY 'ARD TO HOUNDS FOR A DOZEN
SEASONS OR MORE, TO MY KNOWLEDGE, HAS THAT 'OSS. NOW, TAKE MY ADVICE,
DON'T KEEP 'EM WAITIN' FOR 'IM ANY LONGER,--YOU SEND 'IM TO 'EM!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

"ROUGE GAGNE"?

[Illustration: "ROUGE GAGNE"?

[M. HENRI ROCHEFORT AT MONTE CARLO.] ]

  Make your Game! Is't fortune, fame,
    Power supreme, mere notoriety,
  'Tis mere gambling all the same,--
    Craving knowing not satiety.
  Marquis or Gavroche, what matter?
    Rabagas or Noble Red;
  How the bullion's clink and clatter
    Fires the eye and heats the head!
  Mammon-Mephistopheles
    At the sight in shadow grins;
  And the player, at his ease,
  With a dream his heart may please,
          Red wins!

  _Will_ it win, or, winning, will
    _La Republique_ lose or gain?
  Is the game chance _versus_ skill,
    Sly intrigue 'gainst heart and brain?
  Sanguine as sanguineous,
    The Mob-loving Marquis sits.
  Exile, will _finesse_ and fuss,
    Clack of tongues, and clash of wits,
  Play the patriotic game?
    Fall the cards, the ball re-spins!
  Blood a-fire and walls a-flame
  Menace if--to Wisdom's blame--
          Red wins!

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LONG FROST.--Sportsmen are coming up to town in despair. Their
hunters are "eating their heads off," and very soon there will be
nothing left to tell the tail!

       *       *       *       *       *

IN THE LORDS.--Lord BATTERSEA "the Flower of the Flock."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SEVERE WEATHER.

(_From Mr. Punch's Very Special Correspondents._)

Reports from all parts of the country are eloquent of the phenomenal
nature of the weather experienced everywhere. By an extraordinary
coincidence, of which it is hardly possible to make too much, the
intense cold has been accompanied by a lowness of temperature--on the
(Fahren) height.

The Oldest Inhabitant has had a high old time, and been in immense
form. To prevent the extinction in future years of this interesting
individual, oxen have been roasted freely, and, wherever at all
practicable, carriages have been driven over frozen rivers.
Occasionally irreverent descendants have roasted the Oldest
Inhabitant.

It is reported, on the authority of Lord SALISBURY, that the Liberal
Party intend at once to engage in snowballing the House of Lords. As
the ex-Prime Minister has promised to play the game with no lack of
mutuality, interesting developments are expected.

A very remarkable occurrence comes from abroad--considerations of an
international character make it advisable not to particularise
further. A bishop went out in the middle of a raging blizzard.
Although the bishop was suitably attired in episcopal dress, so that
no mistake as to his identity was possible, it went on blizzarding,
and the spiritual dignitary was put to extreme temporal temporary
inconvenience.

Ice floes have penetrated to London Bridge. Mr. SEYMOUR HICKS'S
topical song in the _Shop Girl_--"Oh, floe! ice and snow, you
know"--is received every night with even greater enthusiasm than
formerly.

The following letter will NOT appear in an early number of _The
Spectator_:--

   ***

ANIMAL SAGACITY.

DEAR SIR,--I desire to draw your attention to what I think I may
fairly describe as a wonderful instance of animal sagacity. During the
recent severe frost a large number of birds and rabbits were fed every
day in my garden. On Friday, for the first time, I noticed a fine
hare, which, from its appearance, evidently felt the cold bitterly. I
fed it, but shivering set in, and pained by its suffering (for I have
a kind heart) I took it into the kitchen. Half-an-hour afterwards the
cook came to tell me that the kitchen-maid was in hysterics. I went
down and found out the reason--the girl had been frightened, when
taking up a large jug which stood on the ground, to find the hare in
it! The hare, poor thing, preferred a warm death to a cold existence,
but, denied the possibility of human speech, had taken this graphic
way of indicating its wishes. I have only to add that they were
respected at dinner yesterday.

      Yours faithfully,
        PEIL ITON.

    _Stickiton Rectory._

       *       *       *       *       *

MEM.--It would not be logical to conclude that Sir ARTHUR SULLIVAN is
a good cricketer because of his capital scores.

       *       *       *       *       *

AN EXPENSIVE CALL TO PAY.--A Call to the Bar.

       *       *       *       *       *

LITTLE MOPSEMAN.

THE THIRD ACT.

    _An elevation and rockery in_ FRUeYSECK'S _back-garden, from
    which--but for the houses in between--an extensive view over the
    steamer-pier and fiord could be obtained. In front, a
    summer-house, covered with creepers and wild earwigs. On a bench
    outside_, MOPSA _is sitting. She has the inevitable little
    travelling-bag on a strap over her shoulder._ BLOCHDRAeHN _comes up
    in the dusk. He, too, has a travelling-bag, made of straw,
    containing professional implements, over his shoulder. He is
    carrying a rolled-up handbill and a small paste-pot._

_Sanitary Engineer Blochdraehn_ (_catching sight of_ MOPSA'S
_handbag_). So you really _are_ off at last? So am I. _I_'m going by
train.

_Mopsa_ (_with a faint smile_). Are you? Then _I_ take the steamer.
Have you seen ALFRED anywhere about--or SPRETA?

_San. Eng. Bloch._ I have been seeing a good deal of _Mrs._ FRUeYSECK.
She asked me to come up here and paste one of these handbills on the
summer-house. To offer a reward for Little MOPSEMAN, you know. I've
been sticking them up everywhere. (_Busied with the paste-pot._) But
you'll see--he'll never turn up.

_Mopsa_ (_sighing_). Poor SPRETA! and oh, poor _dear_ ALFRED! I really
don't know if I _can_ have the heart to leave him.

_San. Eng. Bloch._ (_pasting up the bill_). I shall not believe it
myself until I actually see you _do_ it. But why shouldn't you come
along with me, if you _are_ going--h'm?

_Mopsa._ If you were only a married man--but I have to be so careful
_now_, you know!

_San. Eng. Bloch._ It tortures me to think of our two handbags each
taking its own way; it really does, Miss MOPSA. And then for me to
have to plumb all by myself. Though, to be sure, one can always get
round the district surveyor alone.

_Mopsa._ Ah, yes, _that_ you can surely manage alone.

_San. Eng. Bloch._ But it takes two to connect the ventilating shaft
with the main drainage.

[Illustration: "It takes two to connect the ventilating shaft with the
main drainage."]

_Mopsa_ (_looking up at him_). Always two? Never more? Never many?

_San. Eng. Bloch._ Well, then, you see, it becomes quite a different
matter--it cuts down the profits. But are you sure you can never make
up your mind to share my great new job with me?

_Mopsa._ I tried that once--with ALFRED. It didn't quite
answer--though it was delightful, all the same.

_San. Eng. Bloch._ Then there really _has_ been a bright and happy
time in your life? I should never have suspected it!

_Mopsa._ Oh yes, you can't think how amusing ALFRED was in those days.
When he distinguished himself by failing to pass his examinations, and
then, from time to time, when he lost his post in some school or
other, or when his big, bulky manuscripts were declined by some
magazine--with thanks!

_San. Eng. Bloch._ Yes, I can quite see that such an existence must
have had its moments of quiet merriment. (_Shaking his head._) But I
_don't_ see what in the world possessed ALFRED to go and marry as he
did.

_Mopsa_ (_with suppressed emotion_). The Law of Change. Our latest
catchphrase, you know. ALFRED is so subject to it. So will _you_ be,
some day or other!

_San. Eng. Bloch._ Never in all my life; whatever progress may be made
in sanitation! (_Insistently._) Can't you _really_ care for me?

_Mopsa._ I might--(_looking down_)--if you have no objection to go
halves with ALFRED.

_San. Eng. Bloch._ I am behind the times, I daresay; but such an
arrangement does _not_ strike me as a firm basis for a really happy
home. I should certainly object to it, most decidedly.

_Mopsa_ (_laughs bitterly_). What creatures of convention you men are,
after all! (_Recollecting herself._) But I _quite_ forgot. I am
conventional _myself_ now. You are perfectly right; it _would_ be
utterly irregular!

_Alfred_ (_comes up the steps_). Is it you, BLOCHDRAeHN, that has
posted up that bill? On the new summer-house!

_San. Eng. Bloch._ Yes, Mrs. FRUeYSECK asked me to.

_Alfred_ (_touched_). Then she _does_ miss Little MOPSEMAN, after all!
Are you going? Not without _MOPSA?_

_San. Eng. Bloch._ (_shaking his head_). I did invite her to accompany
me; but she won't. So I must make my jobs alone.

_Alfred._ It's so horrible to be alone--or _not_ to be alone, if it
comes to that! (_Oppressed--to himself._) My troll is at it again! I
shall press her to stay--I _know_ I shall--and it will end in the
usual way!

_Spreta_ (_comes up the steps, plaintively_). It _is_ unkind of you
all to leave me alone like this. When I'm so nervous in the dark, too!

_Mopsa_ (_tenderly_). But I _must_ leave you, SPRETA, dear. By the
next steamer. That is----Well, I really _ought_ to!

_Alfred_ (_almost inaudibly, hitting himself on the chest_). Down, you
little beggar, down! No, it's no use; the troll _will_ keep popping
up! (_Aloud_) Can't we persuade you, dear MOPSA? Do stay--just to keep
SPRETA company, you know!

_Mopsa_ (_as if struggling with herself_). Oh, I want to so much! I'd
do _anything_ to oblige dear SPRETA!

_San. Eng. Bloch._ (_to himself, dejectedly_). She is just like that
Miss HILDA WANGEL for making herself so perfectly at home!

_Spreta_ (_resignedly_). Oh, _I_ don't mind. After all, I would rather
ALFRED philandered than fretted and fussed here alone with me. You had
better stay, and be our Little MOPSEMAN. It will keep ALFRED
quiet--and that's _something_!

_Mopsa._ No; it was only a temporary lapse. I keep on forgetting that
I am no longer an emotional Cuckoo heroine. I am perfectly
respectable. And I will prove it by leaving with Mr. BLOCHDRAeHN at
once--if he will be so obliging as to escort me?

_San. Eng. Bloch._ Delighted, my dear Miss MOPSA, at so unexpected a
bit of good luck. We've only just time to catch the steamer.

_Mopsa._ Then, thanks so much for a quite _too_ delightful visit,
SPRETA. So _sorry_ to have to run away like this! (_To_ ALFRED, _with
subdued anguish_.) I am running away--from _you_! I _entreat_ you not
to follow me--not _just_ yet, at any rate!

_Alfred_ (_shrinking back_). Ah! (_To himself._) If it depends upon
our two trolls whether----. (MOPSA _goes off with_ Sanitary Engineer
BLOCHDRAeHN.) There's the steamer, SPRETA.... By Jove, they'll have a
run for it! Look, she's putting in.

_Spreta._ I daren't. The steamer has one red and one green eye--just
like MOPSEMAN'S at mealtimes!

_Alfred_ (_common-sensibly_). Only her lights, you know. She doesn't
mean anything _personal_ by it.

_Spreta._ But they're actually mooring her by the very pier
that----How can they have the _heart!_

_Alfred._ Steamboat companies have no feelings. Though why _you_
should feel it so, when you positively loathed the dog.

_Spreta._ After all, you weren't so particularly fond of him yourself;
now _were_ you, ALFRED?

_Alfred._ H'm, he was a decent dog enough--for a mongrel. I didn't
_mind_ him; now you _did_.

_Spreta_ (_nods slowly_). There is a change in me now. I am easier to
please. I could share you with the mangiest mongrel, if I were only
quite sure you would never again want to follow that minx MOPSA,
ALFRED!

_Alfred._ I never said I _did_ want to; though I can't answer for the
troll. But I must go away _somewhere_--I'm such a depressing companion
for you. I shall go away up into the solitudes--which reminds me of an
anecdote I never told either you or MOPSA before. Sit down and I will
tell it you.

_Spreta_ (_timidly_). Not the one about the night of terror you had on
the mountains, ALFRED, when you lost your way and couldn't find a
policeman anywhere about the peaks? Because I've heard _that_--and I
don't think I _can_ stand it again.

_Alfred_ (_coldly and bitterly_). You see that I have really nothing
to fill up my life with, when my own wife refuses to listen to my
anecdotes! Now MOPSA always---- What is all that barking down there in
the town?

_Spreta_ (_with an outburst_). Oh, you'll see, they've found Little
MOPSEMAN!

_Alfred._ Not they. He'll _never_ be found. Those handbills of yours
were a mere waste of money. It is only the curs fighting in the
street--as usual.

_Spreta_ (_slowly, and with resolution_). Only that, ALFRED. And do
you know what I mean to do, as soon as you are away solitudinising up
there in the mountain hotels? I will go down and bring all those poor
neglected dogs home with me.

_Alfred_ (_uneasily_). What--the whole _lot_ of them, SPRETA?
(_Shocked._) In our Little MOPSEMAN'S place!

_Spreta_ (_firmly and decidedly_). Every one. To fill Little
MOPSEMAN'S place. They shall dig up his bones, lie on his mat, take it
in turns to sleep in his basket. I will try to--h'm--lighten and
ennoble their lot in life.

_Alfred_ (_with growing uneasiness_). When you simply detest all dogs!
I don't know _anyone_ less fitted than you to manage a Dog's Home. I
really don't!

_Spreta._ I must fill the void in my life _somehow_--if you go and
leave me. And I must educate myself to _understand_ dogs better,
that's all.

_Alfred._ Yes, that you would _have_ to do. (_As if struck with an
idea._) Before you _begin_. Suppose I take up my big fat book on
_Canine Idiosyncrasy_ once more, eh? That would teach you how to
purify and ennoble every poodle really scientifically, you know. Only
you must promise to wait till I've got it _done_.

_Spreta_ (_with a melancholy smile_). I am in no hurry ALFRED. Only to
write that you would have to remain at home.

_Alfred_ (_half evasively_). Not necessarily. I _might_, of
course--for a while, that is. But I shall have many a heavy day of
work before me, SPRETA, and you will see, now and then perhaps, a
great slumberous peace descend on me as I toil away in my brown
study--but I shall be making wonderful progress all the same.

_Spreta._ I shall quite understand _that_, ALFRED. Oh, dear, who in
the world's this?

    [The VARMINT-BL[=O]K _appears mysteriously in the gloom_.

_The Varmint-Bl[=o]k._ Excuse me, Captin, and your sweet ladyship, but
I just happened to drop my eye on one of those lovely little
hand-billikins here, and took the liberty to step up, thinking it
might so happen that you'd been advertising the very identical dawg
what followed me home the other day. You may remember me passing the
remark how wonderful partial dawgs was to me. So I brought him up on
the chance like.

    [_He produces_ Little MOPSEMAN--_in mufti--from a side-pocket_.

_Spreta._ It _is_ our Little MOPSEMAN! So you are _not_ some
supernatural sort of shadowy symbol after all, then?

_The Varm.-B._ (_hurt_). Now I ask you, lady--do I look it? Here's my
professional card. And if you _should_ have the reward handy---- (_As_
ALFRED _pays him_.) Five Rix dollarkins--correct, my lord, and thankee
kindly. (_As he departs._) You'll find I've learned that sweet little
mongrel a thing or two; take the nonsense out of any rat in Norway
_now_, he will. And just you ask him to set up and give three cheers
for Dr. IBSEN--that's all!

    [_He goes out, chuckling softly._

_Alfred_ (_holding out_ Little MOPSEMAN _at arms' length_). H'm; it
will be a heavy day's work to purify and ennoble this poodle after all
he has been through, eh, SPRETA? I think, as you seem to have
developed quite a taste for such tasks, I shall allow _you_ to
undertake it--all by yourself.

_Spreta_ (_turns away with her half-teasing smile_). Thanks!

THE END.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR BOOKING-OFFICE.

"Before you finish your whiff and depart to dress for dinner," quoth
the Baron, "just read through Mr. ESCOTT'S article in the
_Fort-nightly_." If you lived in Literary Bohemia many years ago, it
will revive pleasant memories, and if you didn't, it will interest
those who did with whom, in conversation at dinner, you can start the
subject. Bohemia exists always; only, as Mr. LAUDATOR TEMPORIS ACTI
will, of course, sing, it was at its best in

    "The days when _we_ went gipseying
      A long time ago!"

"Glad to see Mr. ESCOTT'S pen at work again," quoth the kindly

      BARON DE B.-W.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PROFESSIONAL INSTINCT.

_Kindly Gentleman_ (_from True Blue Club_). "AND WHAT HAS BROUGHT YOU
TO THIS DEPLORABLE CONDITION? DRINK?--GAMBLING?"

_Gentleman of the Pavement_ (_spotting his man_). "NO, INDEED, SIR; MY
MISFORTUNES ARE ENTIRELY ATTRIBUTABLE TO FREE TRADE, MONOMETALLISM,
AND THE DEATH DUTIES."

    [_Immediate relief on a generous scale._
]

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. A.'S AT HOME.

  _An awful night!_ I do believe it's snowing!
    Who from his "ain fireside" would wish to roam?
  Only a fool would go--and yet I'm going--
            To Mrs. A.'s At Home!

  The burden of At Homes! The bore of dressing!
    I must be wielding razor, brush, and comb
  (The snow has almost stopped--Come, that's a blessing!)
            For Mrs. A.'s At Home.

  Why am I going? Well, to me the reason
    Looms large and clear as Paul's cathedral dome:
  The reason's--NANCY, whom I met last season
            At Mrs. A.'s At Home.

  Hi, hansom! Off we go! Although sweet NANCY
    Since then has vanished like a fairy gnome,
  Yet I shall see her (sweet conceit) in fancy
            At Mrs. A.'s At Home.

  "Thankee, my lord!"--he's earned that extra shilling,
    We've come along, the horse is flecked with foam--
  Slowly upstairs I go, the rooms are filling
            At Mrs. A.'s At Home.

  Then--why, good heavens! No! It isn't fancy!--
    "Can it be you? I heard you were in Rome.
  Just fancy meeting you"--the real NANCY!--
            "At Mrs. A.'s At Home!"

  To-night and NANCY--rhyme excuses fiction--
    Might, if I sang them, fill a ponderous tome:
  _A perfect night!_ I breathe a benediction
            On Mrs. A.'s At Home!

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A DISTINGUISHED AMATEUR.

"ACH! DAT IS A PUTIFUL ZONG, LATY PEACOCKE, AND YOU BRONOUNCE CHERMAN
VERY VELL--POT VY DO YOU BLAY ZE AGGOMBANIMENT IN B NATURAL?"

"THE SONG'S WRITTEN IN B NATURAL, HERR MAESTRO."

"ACH ZO! ZEN VY DO YOU ZING ZE MELOTY IN B VLAT?"

"OH, _REALLY_, HERR MAESTRO! I DON'T PRETEND TO BE A _PROFESSIONAL_,
YOU KNOW. I ONLY SING JUST TO PLEASE MY FRIENDS!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

"THE LIGHT FANTASTIC!"

    His task demands sinews and nerves
      As tough and as supple as hickory;
    He's done if he stumbles or swerves,
      This Titan-like pet of Terpsichore.
    What wonder he seems strung on wires
      From the tip of his trunk to his very toe,
    Performing a feat which requires
      The joint skill of BLONDIN and CERITO?
  Ah, JUMBO! stretch balance-wise tail-whisp and trunk,
  For you'll never get through if you fumble or funk.

    Scarce "light" is his ponderous form,
      And his footing is hardly "fantastic."
    It makes one grow nervous and warm
      To watch this colossus gymnastic.
    Can't "trip it,"--although he may _trip_,--
      His tentative toes throb and tremble;
    He waggles his tail like a whip:
      There's danger, but _he_ must dissemble;
  And though he an imminent downfall may dread,
  Must walk o'er the bottles with confident tread.

    For Titan to dance on a tub
      As steady as--CECIL'S majority,
    Is easy, but--oh! there's the rub--
      The bottle-trick has the priority.
    It comes first "by special request,"
      And there isn't a chance of evasion.
    Poor JUMBO must fain do his best,
      Though he'd rather postpone the occasion.
  Titan-_Turreydrop_ now on St. Stephen's new floor
  Can't choose his own figures or steps any more!

    There are plenty of "turns" he'd prefer,
      And numbers of tricks he'd do better.
    His "Gradation Dance" made a great stir.
      But, alas, for the goad and the fetter!
    As his enemies pipe he must dance,
      To public opinion he's plastic;
    And so, with a dubious glance,
      He essays this untried "Light Fantastic."
  From bottle to bottle slow picking his way,
  As an overture forced to the programme he'd play!

       *       *       *       *       *

THE HARD FROST.

(_Communications Intercepted in Transit._)

_From a School Boy to his Younger Brother._--My dear BOBBIE,--How are
you getting on at home? We are having a high old time at SWISHERS'.
All the pipes frozen, and no water to be got anywhere! And it is so
comfortable!

      Yours, &c.,
        JACKIE.

_From a Firm of Coachbuilders to one of their Customers._--Dear
Sir,--As there is every reason to believe that the present severe
weather will last for a considerable time, may we have the honour of
building for you a sleigh? We shall be pleased to have the vehicle
ready for you in the course of a month, or at the latest six weeks.
Should the weather break in the meanwhile, it will be available under
similar conditions next year or the year after. It will also be quite
possible to carry the sleigh to Siberia, where it will at all times be
found, not only a luxury, but a necessity. We are, dear Sir, awaiting
your esteemed order,

      BROWN, JONES, AND ROBINSON.

_From a Dramatist to an Intimate Friend._--My dear BILL,--Thank you
for the marked paper you have forwarded to me. But the statistics are
misleading. Talk about this being the greatest frost on record! You
would not say so if you had been present at the first night of my
play, _The Force of Circumstances_.--Yours gloomily,

      SHAKSPEARE TOMKINS.

_From a Celestial Official to the Public._--Poor creatures,--You think
you have seen the worst of the winter! Just like your presumption!
When I can manage a sky salad of rain, fog, snow, thunderbolts and
sunshine all mixed together in the course of ten minutes and set it
before a London audience in the midst of a modern January, don't you
be too sure of anything! Wait, my melancholy maniacs, and you shall
see what you may possibly live to witness.--Yours disrespectfully,

      THE CLERK OF THE WEATHER.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SLY OYSTER.

    "There is an exception to every Rule."

      _Bayliss's "Mayden Lane."_

  'Tis the voice of the Oyster,
    I heard him complain,
  "You have woke me too soon,
    I must slumber again.
  I'm fat and quite well--
    Have no doubt on that head--
  But say that I'm ill,
    And _do_ leave me in bed.

  "Just a little more sleep,
    Just a little more rest;
  How sweet, my dear friends,
    I shall be at my best!
  Oh, let me repose
    Say till May--May the one'th--
  When, as everyone knows,
    There's no 'R' in the month!"

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "THE LIGHT FANTASTIC!"

THE GREAT SAGACIOUS ELEPHANT "SIR BILL" IN HIS "THRILLING ACT."]

       *       *       *       *       *

A VALENTYNE.

(_And a Remonstrance._)

[Illustration]

  This day to yow, dere ladye, wol I schowe
  Myn hertes wissche--_cum privilegio_.
  Of alle seintes nis ther more benigne
  To man and mayden noon thanne Valentyne;
  Sith everych yeer on that swete seintes day
  Man can to mayden al his herte displaie
  (Bye Cupid arwes smit in sory plighte--
  One grote al pleyn, and twayn ypeinted brighte).
  Then wol I mak my playnte, so maist ye knowe
  Yon whele, dere ladye, don me mochel wo.
  Algates I greve, whanne that scorchours I mete
  That riden reccheles adoun the strete:
  I praie, bethynke yow, swiche diversioun
  Ben weel for mayde of mene condicioun,
  But ladye fayre in brekes al ydighte
  Certes meseems ne verray semelye sighte.
  Swiche gere, yclept "raccionale," parde,
  Righte sone wol be the dethe of chivalrye;
  And we schal heren, whanne that it be dede,
  The verdite, "Dethe by--Newe Womman-hede."
  Heede then theffect and end of my prayere,
  Upyeve thy whele, ne mannissche brekes were,
  Contente in graces maydenlye to schyne,
  So mote ye be myn owen Valentyne.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Just the weather for receiving a sharp retort," observed our laughing
Philosopher, with his snow-boots on. Naturally his friend wished to
know why. "Because," replied Dr. CHUCKLER, "with the temperature below
zero, no one can object to having _a wrap over the knuckles_." Then
away he went merrily over the unartificial ice on the Serpentine.

       *       *       *       *       *

TOBY TO H.R.H.

    [_A propos_ of cropping dogs' ears, a letter from Sir F. KNOLLYS
    appeared last week in the _Stock-Keeper_, informing an inquirer
    that H.R.H. had never allowed any dog of his to be "mutilated,"
    and was pleased to hear that "owners of dogs had agreed to abandon
    so objectionable a practice."]

  We humbly thank the Prince of WALES,
  Henceforth we'll keep our ears and tails
  Intact, and shall not dread the shears
  Which used to crop our tails and ears.
  As novelists in magazines,
  And writers of dramatic scenes,
  By editorial scissors caught
  Object to have their tales cut short,
  So we, gay dogs: for gay we'll be,
  Henceforth the best of company!
  Convivial we around a joint,
  And not a tail without a point.
  Not cropped like convicts from the gaols!
  "Ear! Ear!" and "Bless the Prince of WALES!"

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

MUSICAL NOTE.--The title of a song, "_Come where the Booze is
Cheaper_," has become widely known owing to a recent trial. We believe
we are correct in saying that this song about "the Booze" is _not_
published by the well-known firm of "BOOSEY & CO."

       *       *       *       *       *

TALL TALES OF SPORT AND ADVENTURE.

(_By Mr. Punch's own Short Story-teller._)

I.--THE PINK HIPPOPOTAMUS. (CONTINUED.)

I ought to mention that the Ranee, the aunt of my darling CHUDDAH, was
as susceptible as she was haughty and ferocious. During my stay in the
capital I had had several interviews with her, and I could not
disguise from myself--why should I?--that she regarded me with no
common favour. Indeed, she had taken the somewhat extreme step of
informing me semi-officially (so that she might afterwards, if
necessary, be at liberty to disavow it) that, if I would only consent
to marry her, she would undertake to poison Sir BONAMY BATTLEHORN. I
should thus be elevated not only to the supreme command of the British
forces, but also to the throne of the Diamond City. But I withstood
her blandishments, captivated, as I was, by the tender maidenly
loveliness of CHUDDAH, and the wicked old woman had sworn to have her
revenge. I had, of course, a staunch ally in her brother, the MEEBHOY,
but in his disabled condition, that veteran warrior could be of little
real use to me. Still he knew of my love for his niece CHUDDAH, and,
knowing all my worth, he had already consecrated with his blessing our
prospective union. On this particular evening I found CHUDDAH in her
cosy little boudoir alone, save for the presence of her stout and
comfortable old Ayah or Nana. The darling girl sprang up as I entered
the room and threw herself into my arms in a passion of affection. I
gently disengaged her arms from about my neck, and proceeded, as best
I could, to inform her that I had come to take leave of her for a
short time. Her grief was terrible to witness.

"Oh, my own!" she sobbed (I translate her language); "my very, very
own, my tall and gorgeously beautiful son of the fair-faced English,
my moon of radiant splendour, my star of aspiring hope, say not thou
art come to say farewell, say it not my dearest Duffadar, for CHUDDAH
cannot bear it."

"But, my darling," I urged, "duty calls, and CHUDDAH would not have
her ORLANDO flinch."

The beautiful girl admitted the force of this appeal and a renewed
scene of affectionate leave-taking took place. Suddenly the Ayah, who
up to this moment had been dozing in her arm-chair, rose, and holding
up a warning hand said, "Hist!"

We did so, alarmed by the impressive air of the good old nurse.

"Hist! What is that sound?"

[Illustration: "Hist! What is that sound?"]

I listened intently, and sure enough heard a faint tapping, proceeding
apparently from the floor under my feet.

"I suspect treachery," continued the Ayah hurriedly. "'Twas only
yester morn I saw YOUBYOUB scowling at us as we passed by on our early
walk. Oh, beware, my lord, of YOUBYOUB."

This YOUBYOUB, I ought to say, was the young and bloodthirsty Prince
of the Lozen Jehs, a tribe of wild warriors from the north. Betrothed
to the beautiful CHUDDAH at an early age, he naturally viewed with
hatred the advent of one on whom nature had bestowed her favours so
bountifully, and who was bound, therefore, to make himself dear to
CHUDDAH. I knew he detested me, but I had hitherto scorned him. I was
now to discover my mistake.

Scarcely had the words left the Ayah's lips when a loud rumbling made
itself heard: the floor seemed to heave in one terrific crash, there
was a horrible explosion, and before I had time to realise what had
happened we three, CHUDDAH, the Ayah and I, were being propelled
upwards into space at the rate of at least a thousand miles an hour.

(_To be continued._)

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "_ARE_ YOU COMIN' 'OME?"

"I'LL DO ELLYTHIK YOU _LIKE_ IN REASOL, M'RIA--(_hic_)--BUR I _WON'T_
COME 'OME."]

       *       *       *       *       *

TOYS' TALK.

(_Being an unflattering Tale of Hope._)

"There's ingratitude for you," said the Rag Doll marked
"three-and-six."

"Where?" I asked, rousing myself from my meditation on my tambourine
and drumsticks.

She pointed to a figure which had just been placed in the second row.
He was dressed very smartly in a red coat trimmed with tinsel. But he
had an unmistakeable air of second-hand.

"I made that man," said the Rag Doll, "and now he cuts me dead before
them all! It's atrocious! Why, but for me he would have been bought
for five shillings, and would have been the property of the plainest
child in London."

"Not that," I pleaded; "think of----"

"Well, very plain, anyhow. I was ready to bow to him. I almost did."

"In fact, you did."

"I didn't. I declare I didn't."

"Oh, well, you didn't, then. It only looked like it."

"He first came here," said the Rag Doll, "three weeks ago. At that
time he was--quite presentable. He was everything he should be. He
stood firmly on his legs without toppling over, and had his cocked hat
firmly fixed on his head. And his sword----"

"Where did he wear that?"

"He _carried_ that, Mr. WHYTE RABBIT. Don't be silly. Wore it by his
side, you know, and had epaulettes, too."

"He has changed outwardly at least."

"Yes, I know; well, I did that. I took him in hand, and I just taught
him, and now----!"

"Yes, I know. But how did you teach him?"

"I fell upon him. I knocked him from his perch, and in the fall broke
his wretched sword with my own weight!"

"What very arbitrary distinctions you draw!"

"I don't know what you mean. I do like a plaything to be smart,
anyhow. Don't you, Mr. WHYTE RABBIT? You don't play your tambourine
properly. Now I shall take you in hand." And she slipped toward me.

"I prefer to use my own drumsticks. I can make enough noise in the
world without extraneous assistance."

"How silly you are. I don't want to see you spick and span, as if you
were ready to be given away with a pound of tea."

"Still, I don't see why I should alter my drumming----"

"Oh, you are stupid! Of course you admire me!"

"As he did. I see."

"You seem to think that very funny."

"Not a bit."

"Then we are agreed. There is not much fun in our talk."

"You're always so observant. There is not. Short sentences."

"And a _soupcon_ of the unexpressed."

"Which means so very much. When understood?"

She swayed from one side to the other. There was an easterly wind
blowing full from the open north door of the Arcade. I looked unhappy.
There is an understanding that I shall look unhappy except when I am
beating my tambourine with my drumsticks.

"What was I saying before--before you--you know--oh, about our talk,
of course, being rather flat and not very profitable?"

"I have no more to say," said I.

"But he was very angry, for in my fall I broke his nose."

"I have a bad nose, too."

"What's the matter with your nose?" asked the Rag Doll smiling.

"The joint is injured and some of the fur has come off my head--in
fact, I am as bald as the ball of an eighteen-penny bagatelle-board,"
and I contrived (with the assistance of the draught) to roll away a
little.

"You find carriage exercise good for your poor nose?" bubbled the Rag
Doll.

Now when the Rag Doll bubbles--an operation which includes a sudden
slipping down the shelf, the lighting up of glass eyes, a dart of a
kid-covered arm with vague fingers, and a gurgling gust of slipping
drapery--I am in the habit of ceasing to argue the question.

"Well, your fall will not damage the machinery. You have nothing to do
but look--you understand. While I have to beat my tambourine with my
drumsticks."

"But I won't fall upon you. I reserved my weight for the warrior that
was once valued at five shillings and is now reduced to half-a-crown."

"Because you--educated him?"

"Yes. And now he cuts me dead! Why he will be bought by some one with
poorer means, and will be all the more appreciated."

"Of course you did not care for the impoverished soldier?"

"Not a little bit."

"Nor any one else?"

"Oh, well----"

Then I repeated the question several times in such a way that if
written a line of space would be given to every query. It was a notion
of ALEXANDRE DUMAS _pere_ to do the same in his novels. And his
sentences were worth a franc a line. At least, so it has been related.

The Rag Doll looked straight in front of her.

"Hullo, old chappie," I said to myself; "where did you spring from?"

"Why, it's my proprietor!" said the Rag Doll, ceasing to bubble, and
becoming all propriety.

The toy merchant took no notice of what we had said. How could he when
our voices were inaudible? But he dusted us with his feather-brush,
and left us ready for another dialogue. For all that the Rag Doll
didn't think he was coming just then. No more did I.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "ANIMAL SPIRITS."

NO. IV.--THE GLACIAL PERIOD. HYDE PARK, 1895.

"DRIVEN IN BY STRESS OF WEATHER."]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE TEN LITTLE MEASURES.

(_An Unionist's Forecast._)

    [The measures in the Government Programme are ten in number (says
    the _Westminster Gazette_), viz., 1, Irish Land Reform; 2, Welsh
    Disestablishment; 3, Local Veto; 4, One Man, one Vote; 5,
    Charging Election Expenses on Rates; 6, Unification of London; 7,
    A Factory Bill; 8, Establishment of Conciliation Boards; 9,
    Completion of Scottish County Government; 10, Relief of
    Crofters.]

  Ten little measures hung upon the line,
  One went up to the Lords, and then there were nine.
  Nine little measures asked their turn to wait,
  One shoved in to the front, and then there were eight.
  Eight little measures promising us heaven,
  One met a Witler host, and then there were seven.
  Seven little measures crossing the Lords' Styx,
  One of 'em tumbled in, and then there were six.
  Six little measures a-trying to look alive,
  One was talked clean off his head, and then there were five.
  Five little measures on the Session's lea shore,
  One saw GOG and MAGOG there, and then there were four.
  Four little measures as weak as weak could be,
  One o'er an Amendment tripped, and then there were three.
  Three little measures a-looking precious blue,
  One met K-R H-RD-E'S frown, and then there were two.
  Two little measures a-trying a last run,
  One of them had "special Scotch," and then there was one.
  One little measure then aspired to "cop the bun,"
  H-RC-RT coolly chucked it up, and then there were None!

    [_And then the Government went out, and Unionists had fun!_

       *       *       *       *       *

ESSENCE OF PARLIAMENT.

EXTRACTED FROM THE DIARY OF TOBY, M.P.

_House of Commons, Tuesday, February 5._--Almost thought just now we
were going to have another BRADLAUGH business. House crowded; Members
on all sides eager for the fray. At the bar, closely packed, stood
group of newly-elected Members. Seen some of them here before.
BROADHURST back again after what seems years of exile. ELLIOTT LEES,
deep in thought as to where he shall next go for his groceries in
Birkenhead, in centre of the group. The new Solicitor-General, our old
friend FRANK LOCKWOOD, like a tall maple (not Sir BLUNDELL), lifts his
head and smiles.

"Members desiring to take their seats will please come to the table,"
says the SPEAKER.

BROADHURST, in the van, sprang forward. Had made a fair start when
HENRY JAMES, watchful in aerie on corner bench below gangway, leaped
to feet and proposed to discuss the legality of situation. Objection
founded on abstruse mathematical problem. Two writs had been moved to
fill vacancies in the representation of Leicester. There had been only
one election. There should, HENRY JAMES argued, have been two.
Consequently, election invalid; the two new Members for Leicester not
Members at all, only strangers, intruders across the bar, liable to be
whipped off in custody of Sergeant-at-Arms.

Here was a pretty prospect for opening of Session to which SQUIRE OF
MALWOOD had come with his pocket full of Bills! Sergeant-at-Arms
glanced uneasily at BROADHURST retreating before interruption. What if
repetition of the old process were imminent? Were there to be more
carpet-dances on floor of House through summer afternoons, as was the
wont of Captain GOSSET pirouetting to and from the Mace, House not
quite sure whether he was clutching BRADLAUGH or BRADLAUGH him? Then
the merry scenes in the outer hall, BRADLAUGH fighting at long odds,
finally thrust down the staircase, breathless, his coat torn, his
stylographic pen broken. BROADHURST a stone or two lighter than
BRADLAUGH. But was he equally nimble-footed? Certainly he had not yet
acquired the practice which in the second Session of the controversy
enabled BRADLAUGH and the Sergeant-at-Arms to advance, retire,
_chasser_, and clasp hands across the middle, in perfect time.

But a great deal has happened in the fifteen years that have sped
since, from a corner seat on the side of the House facing HENRY JAMES,
DRUMMOND WOLFF rose, and with emphatic gesture barred BRADLAUGH'S
progress to the table. By striking coincidence that strange chapter in
Parliamentary history, opening by chance accident and leading to
stirring consequences, was finally closed this very night, when
AKERS-DOUGLAS moved writ to fill vacancy created in South Paddington
by death of "Right Hon. RANDOLPH HENRY SPENCER CHURCHILL, commonly
called Lord RANDOLPH CHURCHILL."

HENRY JAMES had not concluded his sentence when SPEAKER interposed
with ruling that there must be no interference with Members desiring
to take their seats. So incident closed. Members for Leicester sworn
in. BROADHURST, in exuberance of moment, made as though he would
publicly shake the hand the clerk held out to take writ of return. But
REGINALD FRANCIS DOUCE PALGRAVE not made K.C.B. for nothing. "The
writ, the writ!" he hoarsely murmured, waving back the friendly hand.
BROADHURST hastily produced document from breast-pocket, and thus
fresh scandal was averted.

_Business done._--Address moved.

   ***

_Wednesday._--Exceptional interest in this afternoon's proceedings in
view of circumstance that ELLIS ASHMEAD-BARTLETT (Knight)--what was it
GRANDOLPH said about mediocrity with double-barrelled names?--would
appear in his new character as SILOMIO. Title conferred during recess
by delegates from Swaziland. Curiosity quickened by report that
_debut_ would be made in character. Yesterday we had mover and
seconder of Address in velvet suits with silver buttons and brands
Excalibur at their side. Why no _Silomio_ in the native dress of the
nation that has adopted him? Some disappointment when he turned up in
ordinary frock-coat. Understood that weather responsible for this.
Swazi morning dress picturesque, but with nine degrees of frost in
Palace Yard a little inadequate, especially for a beginner.

Even in commonplace English dress SILOMIO made a striking figure as he
stood at the table, and belaboured it for "Swaziland, my Swaziland."
Looked at times as if he were going to leap over, and seize by the
throat SYDNEY BUXTON provokingly smiling on the other side. Last
week's handkerchief hanging out from his coat tail pocket, in liberal
measure though crumpled state, lent a weird effect to back view, not
interrupted by inconvenient crowding on front Opposition Bench. Odd
how SILOMIO'S colleagues in late Ministry find business elsewhere when
he rises to orate.

_Business done._--Talking round Address.

   ***

_Thursday._--Rather painful scene in House to-night. CHAPLIN resuming
debate on Address led its course gently by the still waters of
bimetallism. Somehow that a subject that has never quite entranced
attention of frivolous Commons. It works certain subtle spell upon
them. At clink of sovereign and shilling between argumentative finger
and thumb they slink away. So it was to-night whilst CHAPLIN spoke.
Faithful among the faithless found was JEMMY LOWTHER. He sat attentive
beside the orator with an expression of profound wisdom, unmitigated
by boyish habit of keeping his hands in his trouser pocket, not
without suspicion of furtively counting his marbles or attempting to
open his knife with the fingers of one hand.

[Illustration: Spoiling his Peroration]

JEMMY and CHAPLIN rank amongst oldest boys in the school. One took his
seat for mid-Lincolnshire in December, 1868; saw the rise to supreme
power of Mr. G. and, with some intervals, suffered it up to the end.
The other rode in triumphantly from York one July day in 1865. Thus
their united Parliamentary ages if fifty-seven, a record hard to beat.
Shoulder to shoulder they have, through all this time, resisted
attacks on British Constitution. Now, suddenly, publicly, in eye of
the scorner, came sharp parting of the ways.

CHAPLIN viewing state of things depressing industrial communities
admitted it was very bad. Mills closed, mines empty, ship-building
yards silent, workmen starving. Only one thing would save the
State--Bimetallism. "Is there anyone," said the orator with
magnificent wave of arm round desolate benches; "who has any other
suggestion to make for the salvation of these industries?" Then up
spoke JEMMY LOWTHER. "I have," he said with final tug at the blade of
the knife hidden in his pocket.

CHAPLIN stood aghast. Could it be possible--his own familiar friend?
He turned, looked down on him, gasping for breath. Then in a hollow
voice he added, "What has my right hon. friend been doing all this
time? Why doesn't he make his proposal?"

Here was an opening for apology, recantation, or at least, submissive
silence. But JEMMY evidently gone to the bad; got the bit between his
teeth and bolted. "I've made it over and over again," he growled,
thinking resentfully of his much crying in the wilderness for that
blessed thing Protection. Ribald House roared with laughter. CHAPLIN,
cut to heart, avoided repetition of painful incident by bringing
oration to early conclusion.

"Let's put this matter to practical test, TOBY," he said. "Come along
with me, and we'll consult the Unemployed."

Not far to go. On Westminster Bridge a hollow-cheeked man leaning over
low wall stared at ice-floes silently gliding down with the tide. "My
good man," said CHAPLIN, "you look unemployed, and I daresay you're
hungry. Now, in order to put you straight, which would you rather
have, Bimetallism or Protection?"

"Well, if you don't mind, master," said the Unemployed huskily, "I'd
like a chunk o' bread."

"Ah!" said CHAPLIN, "these people are so illogical." And he gave him
half-a-crown.

_Business done._--Drifted into debate on Bimetallism. Business can
wait.

_Friday._--SQUIRE OF MALWOOD left sick room to take part in debate and
division on JEFFREYS' Amendment to Address. Self-devotion dangerous on
foggy, frosty night. But the result worth it, at least for crowded
House that heard the speech. Best thing of the kind done in House
since DIZZY'S prime. SQUIRE evidently profited by necessity for
rapidity of composition. The sharpest barbs aimed at quivering figure
of JOKIM sitting opposite.

[Illustration: A Trifle for the Unemployed!]

"Wot's this he means about stealing my clothes when I was bathing?"
said HARDIE, with puzzled look. "With thirteen degrees of frost under
the fog I DON'T KEIR less than ever about bathing. As for my clothes,
they might suit PRINCE ARTHUR, but they wouldn't quite fit him."

_Business done._--Amendment to Address defeated by twelve votes in
House of 534 Members.

       *       *       *       *       *

Superior Studies.

_Literature and Philosophy Class for Female Students._

_Master._ What is the analogy between _Hamlet_ and MIRABEAU?

_First Girl_ (_rising_). I know. (_Pause, then suddenly, and with
determination._) MIRABEAU didn't get on well with his father, and
_Hamlet_ was at daggers drawn with his uncle.

    [_Reseats herself triumphantly._

       *       *       *       *       *

RESETTING AN OLD SAW.--The descriptive writer in the _Daily
Telegraph_, giving his account of the opening of Parliament, observed
that "Hypercritics have combated the generally accepted axiom that one
pea entirely resembles another," and he went on to show how one
parliamentary crowd resembled any other parliamentary crowd at the
initial ceremony. Assuming therefore this similarity, suppose we
re-set the old saw, and say, "_As like as two M.P.'s_."

       *       *       *       *       *




Note: [=O], [=o] represent O-macron, o-macron.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari, Volume
108, February 16, 1895, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH, CHARIVARI, FEBRUARY 16, 1895 ***

***** This file should be named 45089.txt or 45089.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/0/8/45089/

Produced by Punch, or the London Charivari, Lisa Tang,
Malcolm Farmer and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
