The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari,  Volume
108, March 2nd 1895, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Punch, or the London Charivari,  Volume 108, March 2nd 1895

Author: Various

Editor: Francis Burnand

Release Date: March 9, 2014 [EBook #45093]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH ***




Produced by Punch, or the London Charivari, Lisa Tang,
Malcolm Farmer and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net





PUNCH, OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI

Volume 108. MARCH 2nd, 1895.

_edited by Sir Francis Burnand_




[Illustration: "ANIMAL SPIRITS."

No. V.--GOLF. "THE OLD SCOTCH TERRIORS."]

       *       *       *       *       *

TALL TALES OF SPORT AND ADVENTURE.

(_By Mr. Punch's own Short Story-teller._)

I.--THE PINK HIPPOPOTAMUS. (CONTINUED FROM PAGE 81.)

In these awful circumstances, with the night air whistling past me,
and with my beloved CHUDDAH and her nurse hurtling upwards beside me,
it is scarcely necessary for me to say that I never for an instant
lost my coolness and my perfect self-possession. That the situation
was dangerous, nay, almost desperate, I fully realised, but it is in
these very situations that true courage and resourcefulness are always
of the highest value. Again and again in the course of my long life
have I plucked safety, aye, and that which is higher and better than
all safety, namely, reputation, from the nettle danger. Let fools
prate as they will; the brave man must always rise triumphant above
the stormy waves of envy and detraction.

These thoughts, I admit, did not occur to me at the moment. Our flight
was too perilous and too swift to allow me to think of aught save what
concerned the immediate necessities of this truly fearful crisis. Poor
little CHUDDAH, I observed, being made of lighter material, was
gradually outstripping me in this dreadful and involuntary race. First
her head topped me; then her shoulders soared beyond me; at last her
feet were on a level with my face. As one of them (I forget which)
passed upwards, I was just able by leaning slightly forward, to
imprint a kiss upon it. "Farewell, CHUDDAH," I sighed, as the lovely
foot left my lips. "Farewell, ORLANDO," she murmured all but
inaudibly, and fled up, up, up into the dismal night. I never saw her
again.

The Ayah, however, a stout and heavy woman, was still beside me,
rising inch for inch as I rose. By turning slightly round I could look
at her. I did so. Judge of my horror when I realised by the faint
light of the stars that the Ayah was no longer alive! The shock of the
sudden ascent must have proved too much for one accustomed to the
sedate and comfortable life of an eastern palace, and enfeebled,
moreover, by advancing age. The explosion acting on such a
constitution had snapped the cords that kept life in her faithful
body. The Ayah was dead, and I who tell this tale was alone with a
corpse in the encircling atmosphere! As I realised this horrible
situation, I confess that for the first and last time in my life I
turned faint with a feeling almost amounting to fear. In imagination I
saw myself speeding for ever, as the aeons revolved in their courses,
with only a dead Indian nurse to keep me company. Then, by an
instantaneous revulsion, the grim humour of the situation struck me.
With only my knapsack of provisions and my brandy-flask, it was
unlikely, even under the most favourable circumstances, that I should
be able to prolong life for more than a week. At the end of a week,
then, I too should be a corpse. I laughed aloud as I thought of the
last scion of the WILBRAHAMS, the unconquerable ORLANDO, mated in
mid-air to the dusky Ayah, a skeleton to a skeleton, and my sepulchral
"Ha, ha," went reverberating through the dim spaces of night. The
sound roused me once more. Why, after all, should I die? Life was
sweet; much remained to be done; there were wrongs still to be
redressed in the world below; millions of the oppressed still waited
for a deliverer; countless herds of big game still roamed the prairies
or made their lairs in the forests of earth. No, I would live if I
could, and prove once more the unquenchable fortitude of my race.

At this moment I looked down.

    (_To be continued._)

       *       *       *       *       *

BAR NONE!

_Monday._--Now that the Law lectures at the different Inns have been
"thrown open to the public," _any_ outrage in the way of cringing to
the democracy may be expected. They'll be opening Lincoln's Inn Fields
next to the mob!

_Tuesday._--They _have!_ And a steam merry-go-round set up within
thirty yards of my formerly tranquil Chambers! Oh, why was I ever
called?

_Wednesday._--Dinner in Hall to-day. Found two perfect strangers
dining at my table! Seems that the Benchers have thrown open
dining-hall to the public as well! Asked strangers if they intended
being called to the Bar? One of them replied (with a wink) that _he_
didn't--why should he? He could get all the legal training, use of
library, &c., without going to expense of a call.

_Thursday._--In Court. Unknown Counsel opposed to me. Seem to
recognise his face. _Can_ it be the stranger who dined in Hall last
night? It is. New rule has thrown the Courts open to amateur pleaders!
What _are_ we coming to? Must say stranger pleads uncommonly well. And
Judge _so_ deferential to him!

_Friday._--Wonders never cease. To-day my stranger of yesterday found
seated on Bench! Judge ill--has appointed him as Commissioner in his
place. New rule allows this sort of thing. What is the reason of this
sudden democratising of the Profession?

_Saturday._--Mystery explained. One of the Benchers wants to be made a
L. C. C. Alderman! In his Election Address he even stoops so far as to
give way to the vulgar delusion that Law is expensive, and recommends
a rule that costs should always be "on the lower scale." Perhaps he is
right. Everything on the lowest possible scale at Bar nowadays!

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: RE-GILDING THE GOLDEN EAGLE. (United States Loan,
February, 1895.)

_John Bull_ (_Painter and Decorator_). "ALWAYS READY TO OBLIGE SO GOOD
A CUSTOMER!"

_Brother Jonathan._ "GUESS THIS TIME THE OBLIGATION'S MUTUAL!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

RE-GILDING THE GOLDEN EAGLE.

    ["The amount subscribed in England for the United States Loan was
    L120,000,000, or twenty times the sum reserved for London."--_Daily
    Paper._]

"Why, I was a thinking, Sir," returned MARK TAPLEY, "that if I was a
painter, and was called upon to paint the American Eagle, how should I
do it?"

"Paint it as like an Eagle as you could, I suppose."

"No," said MARK. "That wouldn't do for me, Sir. I should want to draw
it like a Bat, for its short-sightedness; like a Bantam, for its
bragging; like a Magpie, for its honesty; like a Peacock, for its
vanity; like an Ostrich, for its putting its head in the sand, and
thinking nobody sees it----"

"And like a Ph[oe]nix, for its power of springing from the ashes of its
faults and vices, and soaring up anew into the sky!" said MARTIN.

    _Martin Chuzzlewit._

    BROTHER JONATHAN _loquitur:_--

  He was prejudiced, that _Mark_, a Eur[=o]pian, in the dark,
    Concernin' of our Glorious Institutions.
  _He_ paint our Bird o' Freedom? Lots have tried, but we don't heed 'em;
    And revolvin' years bring curus retributions.
  _We_ don't care a brass farden! DICKENS had to beg our pardon,
    And that MAX O'RELL will eat his words one day, Sir!
  The real Yankee Eagle is as strong-winged as a Sea-gull,
    With a beak as sharp as any Sheffield razor.

  Still, he's been a trifle pippy, and has looked a little chippy--
    By the mighty Mississippi yes, Sir!--lately.
  Kinder moulty as to feathers, as though blizzards and bad weathers
    Of every blamed big sort had tried him greatly.
  Good Jee-rusulum! No wonder! for great snakes and buttered thunder!
    Our blasts have been fair busters for his pinions.
  In the words of Mister _Chollop_, all creation he can wallop,--
    But tornaders _have_ been sweepin' his dominions!

  As to that _Mark Tapley's_ twaddle, why the Peacock ain't the model,
    _Nor_ the Bantam, _nor_ the Ostrich, I'd be pickin'
  For the finest fowl in Natur. Better dub him Alligator,
    A Whangdoodle, or a Cincinnati Chicken!
  Like the Ph[oe]nix he's immortal, and he soars to the Sun's portal,
    But--the Ph[oe]nix has sick spells, like lesser poultry.
  Wants fresh fixing up, I reckon, then the dawn once more he'll beckon,
    And sprint--from Memnon's statue to Fort Moultrie.

  BULL ain't an Eagle builder, but he makes a bully gilder,
    And I reckon, guess, and calc'late I'll jest try him.
  If I git from the old fellow a good coat of British Yellow--
    A sort o' paint J. B. keeps always by him--
  My Bird o' Freedom soaring, where the blizzards are a roaring,
    And the cloud-bursts are out-pouring, will jest flicker
  Real rollicking and regal, like a genu-ine Golden Eagle.--
    _Wal!--you've fixed him real smart, JOHN! Let us liquor!_

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A LION IN THE PATH?

OH DEAR NO! MERELY THE "_FIRST OPEN DAY_" AFTER A LONG FROST, AND A
TOM-TIT HAS BEEN INCONSIDERATE ENOUGH TO FLY SUDDENLY OUT OF THE FENCE
ON THE WAY TO COVERT!]

       *       *       *       *       *

TRANCEMOGRIFICATION.

Now that hypnotism is in the air, our conversation-books will have to
be remodelled, as thus:--

Good morning, have you hibernated well?

Yes, I have had a most successful trance this winter. Have you laid up
at all?

Only for a few days at Christmas, just to escape the bills. I had a
delightfully unconscious Boxing Day.

Well, you take my advice old man, and rent a private catacomb on the
three-years' system. It comes much cheaper in the end, and you save
all your coal and gas, to say nothing of clothes.

We've started a Nirvana Club in our neighbourhood on the tontine
principle. The last person who wakes gets the prize, unless the first
who comes to makes off with it.

It is capital, anyway, when you are taking a tour. Saves all the
trouble of sight-seeing. You are just packed up and forwarded from
place to place, with an automatic Kodak which records everything you
visited. Try it!

Will, some day. By Jove, I must be off! I've got to attend an
anaesthetic concert, absolutely painless.

And I've got a mesmeric dinner-party on to-night. All the bores will
be put in glass-cases, and fed mechanically.

Good-bye, then. Sleep well!

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: MEN OF THE HOUR.

THE TURNCOCK

This eminent individual, born in the early forties, comes of a
numerous family, and was originally destined by his parents for the
career of a night-watchman. Not feeling, however, any vocation in this
direction, he tried many other professions, and many other professions
tried _him_. At last, in the year 1864, he entered the service of the
Twiddlesex Water Company, where, by strict attention to the quality of
his liquor, and his unfailing perception of the right time to be
sober, he has risen to his present conspicuous and responsible
position.]

       *       *       *       *       *

OF THE ART OF TOBOGGANING.

    _Canton des Grisons, Feb. 10._

For the neighbourhood it is a sultry day; glass up to 5 deg. Fahrenheit
and a taint of scirocco, or _foehn_, as the facetious native calls this
wind. My toboggan lies idle by stress of drifting snow. "No chance," I
say, "of doing a record this afternoon!" This is what I say openly and
pompously to my fellows. With my own dear heart I commune otherwise,
saying how heaven should be praised for this one blessed day's recess
from broken scalp.

If I have asked myself once (as is proper with an enigma) I have asked
myself a thousand times, "Why did I come out here, to this resort of
invalids and polar athletes?" My right lung is flawless: my left is
very perfect. On the other hand I do not show well on ice; my legs are
ill-shaped for bandy; curling I find to be but poor sport after
skittles; and I have met one wayfarer only, and that a fool, who did
not laugh upon my figure-skating.

In a climate where one must either do or suffer something to justify
one's existence, there remained this sole thing--to toboggan. I said,
"I will surely toboggan!"

"Good!" they said; "but on an instrument of what sort? 'Swiss' for
women and children; ordinary 'Americas' for men; 'Skeleton Americas'
for heroes."

"I will choose the last," I said; for if I do anything at all I like
to do it passing well, and with the best of tools.

There was no lack of willing teachers to illustrate for me the true
posture--_ventre a terre_, and to show me how I should go armed as to
my Alpine boots with spiked rakes screwed to the forefront of my sole
for the better negotiation of sharp angles on the side of a ravine.

One may add that if a pine-tree, or a telegraph post, or an ascending
hay-sleigh opposes your career, you learn by the simple interposition
of your head to save the delicate machinery of the toboggan from
brutalization. It may be that by inadvertence you have attained an
impetus so terrific that you overtake a walking horse in possession of
the path. Once again your headpiece will protect the instrument from
the fiery choler of the beast's hind hoof. After some two miles of
fortuitous descent, diversified by such checks as I have here shadowed
forth, you will be rounding the final corner at a pointed angle of
45 deg., travelling perhaps several miles per hour, when a large beer-cart
with an upward tendency will dispute the road. Then the banked snow
shall be your pall, and your _requiescat_ shall be rendered by the
local teamster in German of a bastard order.

Nor is this all. To the beetling edge of the descent you will first
have been conveyed by an impetuous _zwei-spaenner_, thoughtlessly gay
with bells and feathers. Twenty-five candidates having urged their
claims for the five seats, some will have need to be content to trail
behind on their toboggans. As one wanting in experience, you will have
the last place assigned to you, or else the last but one, with a
casual riderless machine at the tail-end to give you an unholy spasm
as it swings off the track round the corners. At intervals, while your
pensive mind is absorbed upon the maintenance of a happy equilibrium,
rendered strangely-difficult by the ruthless speed of the sleigh, some
two or perhaps three of the tailing-party will fall off in front. The
sharp contact of several raked boots with your open countenance draws
your attention to the altered condition of things. Over the mangled
bodies of friend and foe you are carried forward. The sleigh is
tardily arrested, and your innocent head becomes the recipient of
fearless abuse.

Or again, from some mountain-hut upon the route issues forth a gross
and even elephantine dog, born of unhallowed union between a wolfhound
and an evilly-bred St. Bernard. Foiled in his attack upon the head of
the caravan he revenges himself upon the outstretched leg of the
hindmost. The lacerated calf will be your own.

This is well enough in open daylight, and when you are swathed in
buskins from heel to hip, and your rakes are good for retaliation. But
in doubtful moonlight with the air at 15 deg. below zero, as you toboggan
back to your hostelry in the valley from a fancy dress ball, where you
have simulated _Hamlet_ in black silk tights and pumps, the humour
lies purely on the side of the dog.

But apart from the lower animal nature, in this barbaric sport you are
never confident of your dearest friends. Thus, we had been a pleasant
and hilarious party at the international _bal masque:_ the ardour of
the stirrup-cup was still upon us as we attained the brow of the
decline. By a happy inspiration I had proposed that my friend Mr.
STARK MUNRO, being a heavy-weight and disguised as a _Voelsunga Saga_,
should proceed in the van to clear any incidental drift or desultory
avalanche. He disappeared headlong down the pine-forest track followed
by the Ace of Clubs, a Sardinian Brigand, and a Tonsured Benedictine.
All the costumes gained in picturesqueness from the Arctic background.

The New Woman of the party, attired as Good Queen BESS, begged me to
precede her, arguing that I should go faster on my Skeleton than she
on her Swiss. I engaged to do so on the understanding that she should
allow me seven minutes' start in case of eventualities, the course
being usually done in some 5-3/4 minutes under happy conditions. She
was to be succeeded by Antigone, the Spirit of the Engadine and the
Mother of the Gracchi.

I do not greatly care to linger over the details of my descent. I had
started gaily humming those Elizabethan lines, "Fain would I climb,
but that I fear to fall,"--out of pure gallantry to Good Queen BESS
who had given me a dainty little cow-bell as a favour at the
_cotillon;_ and I had been travelling cautiously for 8-1/2 minutes,
with my nose, no fewer than six fingers, and all the toes on each foot
frostbitten, and a half-moon piece already gone out of my calf at the
spot where it had attracted the notice of the St. Bernard wolf-hound,
when, even as I was navigating a rotten bridge at a sharp turn, I
heard a rushing sound out of the night behind me, and "_Achtung!_"
(the terrible warning-note of the tobogganer) rang in my stricken ear.

I had barely time to throw a backward glance of horror and
deprecation, when the projecting feet of Good Queen BESS, her toboggan
and her spiked steering-pegs were upon me.

The bridge had never been strong in point of bulwarks; the torrent
which it spans is rapid and fed from icy heights; its banks do not
lend themselves to debarkation.

      * * *

When I recovered consciousness by force of exquisitely painful
restoratives applied by the _Voelsunga Saga_, the Mother of the Gracchi
and Good Queen BESS (herself unscratched, though the plush of her
toboggan was tarnished with my gore). I was solemnly intoning, "World
without end: _Achtung!_" with all the conviction of a cathedral tenor.
I am going home the day after to-morrow.

       *       *       *       *       *

SUGGESTION.--A certain restaurant not a hundred miles away from the
St. James's Theatre advertises, among other attractions, "_Diner Salon
Gobelin, 7s. 6d._" But wouldn't it be more appropriate to spell the
last word "Gobbling"?

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ECUADOR BONDHOLDER'S SONG.

AIR--"_Toreador._"

    ["After its recent behaviour, Ecuador cannot be said to have any
    credit worth talking about."--_Times City Article, February 19._]

  Ecuador, contento?
    Ecuador! Ecuador!
  You have all our money spent O,
    Who will lend you more?
    No one here on British shore
    Will lend you more, Ecuador! Ecuador!

       *       *       *       *       *

FROM H. W. L.'s SUMMARY OF THE DEBATE LAST THURSDAY IN THE _DAILY
NEWS_.--"Mr. BARLOW approved the action of the Government in exempting
coarser yarns from duties." This is not exactly what might have been
expected from Mr. BARLOW, but no doubt Masters SANDFORD and MERTON in
the Strangers' Gallery were mightily delighted at the prospect of
"coarser yarns"--(which is only another name for men's stories after
dinner when the ladies have left the room)--being "exempted from
duties." Really our old friend, the preceptor of SANDFORD and MERTON,
has deteriorated, and _Mr. Punch_ is severely against him on this
point.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: FEDERATION FOR THE SNOW-SWEEPERS.

_Leader._ "NOW, DON'T FORGET, THE UNION RATE OF PAY IS FOURPENCE A
DOORWAY. ANY CHAP WORKIN' FOR LESS IS A BLOOMIN' 'BLACKLEG'!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BOOT-BILLS OF NARCISSUS.

AN IRRELEVANT BIOGRAPHY.

(_Scraps collected by Richard Medallion._)

SCRAP I.--HORTICULTURE. (_Boot-trees._)

"Ah! old men's boots don't go there, Sir," said the boot-maker to me
one day, rather pointedly, pointing to the toes of the boots I had
brought him for mending. As I danced home, writing another chronicle
with every springing step, the remark filled me with reflection--such
reflection, reader, as your mirror shows you when you gaze in it to
rejoice in your own beauty.

[Illustration: Published at the Bodily Head. All body and precious
little head.]

Have you kept a diary for thirty years? Dear me! And have you kept
your gas bills, your water-rates, your Christmas-cards, your writs,
your circulars of summer sales? I might never have undertaken to write
this biography if I had not chanced one evening--being unoccupied--to
break open a private desk belonging to my friend NARCISSUS, and
tearing open an envelope (sealed, and labelled "_Compromising
Postcards--to be opened before my death_,") came across these old
boot-bills, and been struck by the manner in which there lay revealed
in them the story of the years over which they ran....

      * * *

SCRAP II.--THE HAPPY HOME.

The first night we went to see GEORGE DONKEYSTIR we heard in the
kitchen a curious voice--suggestive somehow of the vine-leaves in the
hair--singing "_Ours is a Happy, Happy Home!_" In the hall we saw none
but a wee boy of four, standing on his head, balancing a billiard-cue
on his chin.

[Illustration]

"All done by kindness!" lisped the little chap. As we made an attempt
to enter the dining-room, what should fall on our heads but a great
wet sponge, backed by a ring of laughter from the hidden prompter, and
GEORGE appeared, shouting "Bo!" followed by the loving wife, who
helped to make the fun possible. What a time we had! From the moment
we arrived (and fell over a string adroitly arranged by the dear
little children across the little hall) to the moment that we had got
into our little apple-pie beds, all was fun, frolic, merriment, and
domestic joy. Just as we were falling asleep, tired out with a happy
evening, we were disturbed by a chorus, as of _waits_, singing outside
our room these beautiful words--

"O! FLO, what a change you know! When he left the village he was shy,
But since he come into a little bit of splosh His golden hair is
hanging down his back!"

This was more of GEORGE'S loving ingenuity. But we wished he had made
it rhyme. His wife had helped him, but she would not take the credit.
"That was GEORGE'S idea," laughed along her lips. I threatened "to
make copy" of him, and now I have done it. Moreover, I shall further
presume on his forbearance by writing no more about him for the
present.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

ALL THE DIFFERENCE.--In the programme of the Ballad Concerts given in
the _Times_, Mr. BEN DAVIES was advertised to sing SULLIVAN'S "_Come,
Come, Margherita_." Now the title of this song is its refrain, _i.e._,
"Come, MARGHERITA, come!" which is evidently a lover's passionate
invitation, while if it is written as "_Come, Come, Margherita_," it
is clearly only an expostulation of a rather commonplace character
uttered to MARGHERITA, who has been exasperatingly petulant, and who
won't come when asked. For many many years it was the fashion (as it
still is with the veteran tenor) for "MAUD" to be invited to "come
into the garden," just as the fly used to be requested by the spider
to "walk into his parlour." Now it is MARGHERITA who is having her
turn (in the garden) with BEN DAVIES.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE SPORTING INSTINCT.

"COME ALONG, BOBBIE! DON'T LAG BEHIND!"

"WAIT A MINUTE, MOTHER. THERE ARE TWO SOLDIERS GOING TO MEET. I JUST
WANT TO SEE THE BATTLE!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

"WHITTINGTON REDIVIVUS;"

OR, THE BURDEN OF THE BELLS.

    _The new Progressive Dick Whittington, would-be Lord Mayor of
    London, sitteth on Saturday, March 2, 1895, and meditateth on the
    probable meaning of the L. C. C. Election Bells:_--

      Hear the loud Election bells--
              Noisy bells!
  What a world of wonderment their clatter-clash compels!
      How they jangle, jangle, jangle,
        On the air of coming night!
      Like committee-men a-wrangle,
      And my thoughts are in a tangle
        Of mixed doldrums and delight.
      How they chime, chime, chime!
      In my head there runs a rhyme,
  And I wish I were but certain what their shindying foretells,
  What a future I may gather from the voices of the bells--
      The jangling and the wrangling of the bells!

      Now they sound like wedding bells,
              Golden bells!
  Meaning mischief in their music to the Moderates and the swells!
      Their vibrations there's a vox in
      Which to me sounds like a tocsin.
      From their molten golden notes,
              All in tune,
      What a pleasant sound there floats
  Like a promise of Progressive Party Votes,
              Blessed boon!
  Oh, from Bow to Sadler's Wells,
  What a gush of Unity voluminously swells.
              How it swells!
              How it dwells
      On the Future! how it tells
      Of the Progress that impels
      To the swinging and the ringing
              Of the bells, bells, bells.
  From the Brixtons, Claphams, Southwarks, Islingtons and Clerkenwells,
      To the rhyming and the chiming of those bells!

      Hear the Rate-Alarum bells--
              Brazen bells!--
  What base tarradiddles their loud turbulency tells!
      In men's startled ears in spite,
      How they scream out their affright!
      Too much horrified to speak
      They can only shriek, shriek,
              Through the fog,
  In a clamorous appealing to the voters to retire
  That much Progressive Party, which--much like the Rates, or fire--
      Climbeth higher, higher, higher,
      With a desperate desire,
      And a bullying endeavour
      Now--now to sit, or never
              In the seat of Gog-Magog!
      Oh, those bells, bells, bells,
      What a tale their terror tells
              Of despair!
      What reactionary roar!
      What a horror they outpour
  On the bosom of the City and Mayfair.
      Yet the ear it fully knows
              By their twanging
              And their clanging
      How the voting ebbs and flows.
      Yet the ear distinctly tells
              In the jangling and the wrangling
      How Monopoly sinks or swells
  By the sinking or the swelling in the clangour of those bells--
              Beastly bells!--
  There is Landlordism, Ground-rents, Dirty
          Slums, and Drinking Hells
      In the clamour of those horrid Moderate bells!

      Hear the rolling of the bells,--
              Polling bells!
  What a world of solemn thought their monody compels.
      So DICK WHITTINGTON--poor wight!--
      Heard them ringing, with delight
  At the fair prophetic promise of their tone!
      For every sound that floats
      May _I_ too hope my votes
              Will have grown?
      And the People--ah, the People!--
      Is their verdict, from each steeple,
              All mine own?
      Does that tolling, tolling, tolling,
        Mean "Return again my DICK!"
      Or do they as they're rolling
        Mean "turn out" or "cut your stick!"?
  Shall _I_ be "Lord Mayor of London"?
  Or are we Progressives _un_done
              At the Polls?
  Pussy, _what_ is it that tolls
  From each belfry, as it rolls,
              Rolls?
      A paean from the bells
      To the Party of the Swells?
      Or a message from the bells
      That Reaction howls and yells?
      Does that tintinnabulation
      Mean false JOE'S "Tenification"
      Or our own "Unification"?
      Sounds dear "Betterment" this time
      In the rolling Runic rhyme
              Of the bells?
  Does their throbbing mean that jobbing,
  And the London Landlord's robbing,
      Find their finish in these bells?
  That Monopoly is sobbing
      To the sobbing of those bells?
      That their knells, knells, knells,
        Ring out in Runic rhyme?
      Does the rolling of those bells
        Mean that _I_ turn out this time?
      Can they possibly mean _that_,
      Faithful, purring, Pussy-Cat,
      After all your sweet mol-rowing?
      Sounds the verdict "DICK is going"
  In the tolling of the bells, bells, bells, bells, bells,
  In the moaning and the groaning of the bells?

[Illustration: "WHITTINGTON REDIVIVUS."

THE NEW PROGRESSIVE DICK W. "WHAT ARE THE BELLS SAYING, PUSSY? '_TURN
AGAIN_, WHITTINGTON, LORD MAYOR OF LONDON,'--OR IS IT '_TURN OUT_'?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR BOOKING-OFFICE.

Mrs. BONNER has done well to write a record of the life and work of
her father, CHARLES BRADLAUGH, which FISHER UNWIN publishes in two
volumes. If it had been one 'twould have been better. Mrs. BONNER has
been assisted in her labours by Mr. J. M. ROBERTSON, who deals with
Mr. BRADLAUGH'S political doctrine and work, and describes in detail
his parliamentary struggle. The consequence is that the record runs
into two closely-printed volumes, a proportion that somewhat
overweights the interest of the subject. Mrs. BONNER is, naturally,
indignant at the treatment her father received in the early days of
his parliamentary life and in other public relations. But Mr.
BRADLAUGH was a fighting man. He gave hard knocks and, to do him
justice, did not unduly complain when knocks were dealt back to him.
It is a pathetic story how the crowning triumph of his life came in
the hour of his death. He never knew that the House of Commons had
unanimously agreed to the motion which expunged from its journals the
resolution excluding the junior member for Northampton from its
membership. That confession, my Baronite says, was the completest
justification of the action on Mr. BRADLAUGH's part that enlivened the
Parliament of 1880-5 and was the immediate cause of the birth of the
Fourth Party.

Mr. JOHN DAVIDSON'S _Earl Lavender_ is "pernicious nonsense," and the
Aubrey Beardsley frontispiece--if, considering its subject, it can,
with absolute correctness, be described _as_ a
"_front_ispiece,"--might, a few years ago, have endangered its
existence. But "I suppose," quoth the Baron, "I am becoming
old-fashioned, and 'we have changed all that now.' But in view of this
extraordinary illustration, is it a book that can be left out
'promiscuously-like' on the drawing-room table? I trow not," quoth the
Baron. "And as to _The Great God Pan_ ('Key-note' series),
well--infernally or diabolically clever it may be, but should I be
informed," quoth the Baron, "that we should never look upon its like
again, I, for one should not grieve."

Another Keynoteworthy book, _i.e._, one quite worthy to belong to such
of the Key-note series as the Baron has read, is _The Dancing Faun_.
Had a novel appeared some years ago in the palmy, but not less leggy,
days of the drama at the Gaiety, entitled _The Dancing Vaughan_, when
the elegant KATE of that ilk was the light and leading _danseuse_,
what a vogue such a volume would have had among the patrons of the
above-mentioned Temple of Burlesque-Extravaganza. "_Ou sont les neiges
d'antan?_" and "Where is dat barty now?"

    B. DE B.-W.

       *       *       *       *       *

A DOUBLE APPLICABILITY.--"Intrigues which render stable government
impossible," though a phrase applied by the _Times_ to Egyptian
affairs, would, it is clear, be applicable to attempts to get at the
jockey, or the stable assistants, guarding the loose box of the Derby
favourite.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Professional Model._ "IT'S COMIN' TO SOMEFING. BURNEY
JONES A DRAWRIN' FUR DAILY PAPERS! BAD ENUF WHEN 'E DRAW'D FUR THE
FE-AY-TERS. I RECKON 'E'LL BE ON THE PAVEMENT NEXT."

[_Note._--Sir EDWARD BURNE-JONES, who designed the costumes for the
L-c-m, has made a drawing representing "Labour" for the _D-ly
Chr-n-cle_.]

]

       *       *       *       *       *

A SONNET OF SONNETS.

(_A Dreadful Object-Lesson._)

  I've often thought I'd like to write a sonnet,
    I wonder, though, if I can find the way.
    Sometimes you muse upon your mistress--say
  Her eyebrow, then you poetise upon it.
  Maybe instead you celebrate her bonnet,
    A striking symphony in green or grey.
    And when it's done, for many and many a day,
  With eager eye, you ever scan and con it,
  Intent on seeing that it's quite correct,
  And free from all suspicion of defect,
    No inauspicious phrase, no halting line.
      And when the time of scrutiny is past
    Your thought is probably exactly mine--
      Thank heaven! the horrid thing is done at last!

       *       *       *       *       *

A CABINET COUNCIL RECORD.

The _St. James's Gazette_, in giving the news of the Cabinet Council
meeting last Thursday, said, "Mr. JOHN MORLEY left at 12.30, and Mr.
FOWLER a few minutes later; but a messenger was almost immediately
despatched to call the last-named Minister back, and he returned to
the Council Room, and remained until 12.35, when the Council broke
up."

12.30--Mr. MORLEY leaves.

12.33, _i.e._ "a few minutes later"--Mr. FOWLER leaves.

12.33-1/2--Messenger sent after Mr. FOWLER.

12.34-1/4--Messenger returns with Mr. FOWLER.

12.34-1/4--Discussion with Mr. FOWLER.

12.35--Cabinet Council breaks up.

So you see a good deal may happen in five minutes.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AN AUTHORITY ON FASHION.

_Jones_ (_who has come to stay the night at Little Peddlington Hall,
and finds he's forgotten to bring his white ties_). "I WANT SOME WHITE
EVENING TIES, PLEASE."

_The Village Draper._ "I'M SORRY WE 'AVEN'T GOT ANY IN STOCK, SIR. YOU
SEE THE WHITE TIE SEASON HAS 'ARDLY COMMENCED!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

SIGNS OF THE TIMES.

At the re-opening of the Royal United Service Institution last week by
H.R.H. the Prince of WALES, in new premises at Whitehall, a novel and
ingenious electrical instrument was exhibited. By means of this
addition to the list of communicators a general in the field is able
not only to send an autograph letter to a colleague or subordinate at
a distance, but also to convey in _fac simile_ a drawing of his own
composition. On the occasion to which reference is made, the Prince of
WALES sent a message to his brother. To this despatch the Duke of
CONNAUGHT was obliged to respond that he did not quite understand its
full meaning. According to the reports some slight error was
rectified, and then the machine worked to everyone's satisfaction.
However, the fact remains that the initial attempt to convey
intelligibly a message was not entirely successful. To impress upon
those answerable for the perfect action of the instrument the
importance of their task, we subjoin an imaginary scene of a nearly
impossible situation. We will assume that a commander-in-chief is
conversing with a general in the field some ten miles distant.

_Commander-in-Chief_ (_wiring_). We hear here that a force of
twenty-five thousand infantry are advancing by the Dover road with a
view to turning your left front.

_General in the Field._ Kindly repeat. (_Message repeated._) No, we do
not want any more marmalade, as we have plenty of butter.

_C.-in-C._ I said nothing about marmalade, I was talking of the enemy.
Twenty-five thousand men are advancing on your left front.

_Gen._ I think I now understand what you mean, but we can't get near
Woolwich, because our gas has failed us. However, we will look out for
the twenty-five thousand balloons you say are coming.

_C.-in-C._ I said nothing about balloons. Infantry, I spoke of. They
are approaching by the Dover Road.

_Gen._ Thank you for your offer, but we have plenty of hammocks. We
have just seen this. Can you identify her? I forward sketch.

_C.-in-C._ You have sent me what appears to be a drawing of either a
grand pianoforte or a hippopotamus. Which is it?

_Gen._ It is very difficult to make out your messages. We think we
understand your last. Yes, the mail to India did start without the
elephants. We did not know that any had been ordered.

_C.-in-C._ I said nothing about elephants. What is the meaning of your
drawing?

_Gen._ Very sorry; can't make out your message. Besides, have no more
time for telegraphing. Twenty-five thousand infantry of the enemy have
just been noticed on the Dover Road, threatening our left front. Why
did you not tell us they were coming?

But of course, as we have already said, when the hour arrives
everything will be in perfect working order. It is to be hoped that
there will be a supplementary signal to be used in cases of extreme
emergency, to decide promptly a line of action where two courses are
open for adoption. It might signify "Toss up."

       *       *       *       *       *

Nursery Rhyme for the New Woman.

(_When Literary._)

  I had a brutal husband, as is our sex's doom,
  I put him in a problem-novel; then I made it boom!
  I bought a little "Log-roller" who twaddled up and down,
  Discovered it, and slavered it, and made it take the town.
  But meaner beauties of my sex declared I wore blue hose,
  And at my Gospel of Revolt cocked each a pretty nose.

       *       *       *       *       *

"THE RIVALS" AT THE A. D. C.

[Illustration]

Once again I salute you, oh actors of the Cambridge A. D. C., and
congratulate you on your rendering of _The Rivals_--no mean task for a
body of amateur actors. Specially do I note the admirably and
grotesquely humorous impersonation of _Mrs. Malaprop_ by Mr. R. A.
AUSTEN LEIGH. Will the elaborate Wildean paradoxes have to a future
generation the freshness and the laughter-provoking qualities of _Mrs.
Malaprop's_ derangements? I doubt it. At Cambridge the other day I saw
a learned Doctor of Letters in convulsions over the Malapropian
sallies. Will a Doctor of Letters towards the end of the next century
be seen to smile over OSCAR'S inversions? Mr. R. BALFOUR made an
excellent _Bob Acres_, broad in his characterisation, self-possessed
and clear. I should have called him, however, a trifle too smart and
modish in dress. Mr. GEIKIE was very effective in the rages of _Sir
Anthony_, and Mr. WATSON played well as _Jack Absolute_. Admirable,
too, was the _Fag_ of Mr. TALBOT. The leading ladies were, as usual,
miracles of curls and divine complexions. Yet did their voices and
their hands bewray them. We were fortunately spared the gloomy
maunderings of _Julia_ and _Faulkland_. "Hearty congratters," as they
say at the sister university.

    A VAGRANT.

       *       *       *       *       *

HER PUZZLE.--"I recollect," quoth Mrs. R., "a sort of riddle that used
to puzzle me when I was a child, and I can't say I quite see the
answer now. It is this: 'If DICK'S uncle is TOM'S son, what relation
is DICK to JOHN?'"

       *       *       *       *       *

"THE RIGHT MAN IN THE WRONG PLACE."--LABBY, M.P., in the Unionist Lobby,
Monday, February 18.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Son of Toil._ "OW YUS, ME AN' MY MISSUS GITS ON
FUST-CLORSS TERGITHER, SIR. REG'LAR CHUMMY, WE ORE. I TELLS 'ER
EVERYTHINK!"

_Philanthropist._ "EVER TELL HER A LIE?"

_Son of Toil._ "TELLS 'ER EVERYTHINK, I TELL YER----!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ADVISABILITY OF NOT BEING BROUGHT UP IN A HANDBAG.

A TRIVIAL TRAGEDY FOR WONDERFUL PEOPLE.

(_Fragment found between the St. James's and Haymarket Theatres_).

    AUNT AUGUSTA (_an Aunt_).
    COUSIN CICELY (_a Ward_).
    ALGY (_a Flutterpate_).
    DORIAN (_a Button-hole_).
    THE DUKE OF BERWICK.

    TIME--_The other day._ _The_ SCENE _is in a garden, and begins and
    ends with relations_.

_Algy_ (_eating cucumber-sandwiches_). Do you know, Aunt AUGUSTA, I am
afraid I shall not be able to come to your dinner to-night, after all.
My friend BUNBURY has had a relapse, and my place is by his side.

_Aunt Augusta_ (_drinking tea_). Really, ALGY! It will put my table
out dreadfully. And who will arrange my music?

_Dorian._ _I_ will arrange your music, Aunt AUGUSTA. I know all about
music. I have an extraordinary collection of musical instruments. I
give curious concerts every Wednesday in a long latticed room, where
wild gipsies tear mad music from little zithers, and I have brown
Algerians who beat monotonously upon copper drums. Besides, I have set
myself to music. And it has not marred me. I am still the same. More
so, if anything.

_Cicely._ Shall you _like_ dining at WILLIS'S with Mr. DORIAN
to-night, Cousin ALGY?

_Algy_ (_evasively_). It's much nicer being here with you, Cousin
CICELY.

_Aunt Augusta._ Sweet child! I see distinct social probabilities in
her profile. Mr. DORIAN has a beautiful nature. And it is _such_ a
blessing to think that he was not brought up in a handbag, like so
many young men of the present day.

_Algy._ It is such a blessing, Aunt AUGUSTA, that a woman always grows
exactly like her aunt. It is such a curse that a man never grows
exactly like his uncle. It is the greatest tragedy of modern life.

_Dorian._ To be really modern one should have no soul. To be really
mediaeval one should have no cigarettes. To be really Greek----

    [_The_ Duke of BERWICK _rises in a marked manner, and leaves the
    garden_.

_Cicely_ (_writes in her diary, and then reads aloud dreamily_). "The
Duke of BERWICK rose in a marked manner, and left the garden. The
weather continues charming." ...

       *       *       *       *       *

ESSENCE OF PARLIAMENT.

EXTRACTED FROM THE DIARY OF TOBY, M.P.

_House of Commons, Monday, February 18._--Debate on Address finished,
at last. Been on the whole dreary business. Instead of sharp roar of
honest artillery from Opposition camp at opening of campaign, series
of squibs popped off; some of them damp. Novel idea at commencement of
new Session for Opposition chiefs to lurk in the wood armed with
blunderbusses, watching efforts of lesser villains to waylay and
murder Ministers, they coming on scene when these efforts been
repulsed. Novel, but on whole not so successful that we are likely to
see repetition.

Odd thing is that in series of divisions Government had nearest squeak
on motion for the Closure. S. WOODS had amendment on paper; wanted to
have debate adjourned so that another day might be appropriated for
his use; SQUIRE OF MALWOOD thought really been enough talk round
Address. Moved closure. WOODS and two or three other good Radicals go
into Lobby against Ministers; others abstain; Opposition seeing
opportunity flock into Lobby; Ministry saved by eight votes.

"Yes," said the SQUIRE OF MALWOOD as we walked home together, after
last division, "it is not exactly encouraging. But what distresses me
most is the way some of our fellows talk about ROSEBERY. Used to be
old constitutional maxim that the King can do no wrong. Modern reading
on our side is that PREMIER can do no right. Speeches like DILKE'S
to-night hurt me more than anything else." This conversation followed
close on one I had earlier in day with the noble lord.

"How's the Squire looking?" he asked, anxiously. "Bearing up I trust,
against the fatigues of a thankless task. What a few of our men say
about me not the slightest consequence. Passes over me like fluttering
of idle wind. Know all about it. Could, an' I would, describe
animating motive in each case. What cuts me to the heart is their
treatment of the SQUIRE. He manages admirably. Spares no labour; makes
no mistake. Yet whenever some men returned to support us are not
permitted to take in own hands direction of public business, they go
over to the enemy. Great blessing the SQUIRE is endowed by nature with
angelic temper. Otherwise, when this sort of thing happens, he would
chuck up the whole business, and tell malcontents and deserters to
manage matters for themselves."

So nice to have this state of things existing. Sufferers in common
affliction, each thinks only of the other.

_Business done._--Address agreed to after ten days talk.

_Tuesday Night._--Every prospect of quiet evening, even talk of count
out. After spending our nights and days with Address during last
fortnight, small wonder if the hearts of Members, untravelled, fondly
turn to home. Diversion created by appearance on scene of HOWARD
VINCENT. Got up in extraordinary fashion. Round his waist a belt, in
which slung miscellaneous assortment of brushes and other articles of
domestic use. Pendent were hair brushes, hat brushes, tooth brushes,
boot brushes (with case in solid leather), whisk brooms, carpet
sweepers, wall brushes, chimney-sweeping machine (with whalebone head
and chimney cloth), deck scrubbers, one venetian blind-duster, feather
brushes (eight feet long with jointed handles), floor polishers,
hearth brushes (white hair and black), lamp brushes, aid one hair
waver patent for producing in a few minutes, without the use of heated
irons, a natural wavy appearance in the hair. (FRANK LOCKWOOD much
interested in this.)

Other brushes peeped out from every pocket save those at coat-tails,
which, as being more roomy, were reserved for specimens of filters,
fish-kettles, bread-platters, revolving boot-cleaners, specimens of
boxes in which eggs may be safely sent through the parcel-post, and a
lemon-squash stand (oak and nickel mounts complete, with four
tumblers, corkscrew, lemon-knife, and glass sugar basin).

[Illustration: Colonel Howard Vincent bristles with indignation, and
has a brush with the enemy.]

"Been to a bazaar?" I asked; "or are you going to give up military
pursuits, and set up a stall somewhere on your own account?"

"No, TOBY," said the Colonel, severely--"would you just hitch round
the handle of that frying-pan? Thank you; it might get in BARTLEY'S
way whilst I am addressing the House--these few things you see only
partially concealed about my person are the result of the labours of
convicts and felons working in foreign prisons. A Government lost to
all sense of public duty permits their free importation, to the
detriment of honest British workman. You'd better stop and hear me
broil BRYCE."

Colonel walked off with curious clatter, much more effective than the
spurs he wears on field days with the Queen's Westminster Volunteers.
Most interesting lecture, occasionally marred by Colonel, intending at
particular point to produce a blacking-brush, fishing forth from his
miscellaneous store a plated biscuit-box. But the moral all the same.
The articles all made in Germany or elsewhere on Continent. BRYCE glad
to get out of difficulty by offering Committee.

_Business done._--Motion carried for restriction of foreign
prison-made goods.

_Thursday Afternoon._--"Hist!" said Sir HENRY JAMES to JOEY C. "A word
in thine ear. PRINCE ARTHUR away to-night; ground clear; suppose we
occupy it? show PRINCE ARTHUR how we would manage business, and let
the MARKISS see that there are statesmen other than those who hail
from Hatfield and its dependencies. Here's this import duty added on
British yarn entering India. Lancashire members sore about it. Don't
know much on subject myself, but can do simple rule in arithmetic. If
we can detach seven or eight Lancashire Liberals and put on all our
forces, the Government must go. Think how pleasant for PRINCE ARTHUR,
sitting with his feet in hot water and his head out of the window, to
hear the tramp of our messenger along Carlton House Terrace bringing
news that Government is out. If we'd only time we might hire man with
wooden-leg, like the party in _Treasure Island_, wasn't it? Sound of
wooden-leg tramping along silent broadway where PRINCE ARTHUR lives,
and is just now nursing his cold, would be most dramatic. That a mere
detail. Thing is this, Indian cotton business is so much gun-cotton
for Government; I apply torch; up they go--HARCOURT, FOWLER, ASQUITH
(who was so rude to you the other night), and the rest of them. What
do you think?"

JOEY C. is sly, de-vilish sly; said nothing. But he winked.

HENRY JAMES knew that all was well.

[Illustration: Daring Act of attempted Incendiarism; or, "The Light
that failed."]

_Friday_, 12.10 A.M.--Not quite so well as it looked when House met at
three o'clock yesterday afternoon. Ministerialists then in state of
trepidation; Ministers assuming air of resignation. Odds distinctly in
favour of defeat of Government. HENRY FOWLER, formally recognising
situation, had declared they were prepared for the worst. Somehow
things got mixed; explosion took place as arranged; gun-cotton went
off with genial roar; but it was HENRY JAMES blown into the air, and
with him JOEY C. 109 Members mustered under new Opposition Leadership;
304 going with Ministers. Majority, 195.

"Glad I didn't engage the messenger with a wooden leg," said HENRY
JAMES with deepened gloom. "Awful to have a man of that kind going
stamping through a quiet thoroughfare in the dead of the night
carrying news of Government majority of a trifle under 200. Wish
PRINCE ARTHUR would stick to his post and not take colds at such
inconvenient seasons."

_Business done._--HENRY JAMES and JOEY C. go out to shear and come
back shorn.

_Friday_, 8 P.M.--House counted out. Members gone home in state of
hair-bristling perturbation. BRUNNER brought under notice of SPEAKER
circumstances attendant upon mysterious disappearance of JOEY C. last
night. When House cleared for division on JAMES'S motion, JOE seen to
leave and go into Lobby. Thereafter all trace lost of him. Name does
not appear in division list. Witnesses report he was seen endeavouring
to induce SERJEANT-AT-ARMS to unlock door and let him pass through.
SERJEANT incorruptible, inflexible. JOSEPH turned back and straightway
lost to human ken.

"When I was a lad," says WILFRID LAWSON, "I used to be baffled by
inquiry, 'Where was MOSES when the candle went out?' That a plain
proposition compared with this new one, 'Where was JOSEPH when the
division was taken?'" House faced by mystery could not set itself down
to business. Something uncanny about the place. Accordingly got itself
counted out at eight o'clock.

_Business done._--Second reading of London Waterworks Bill carried.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari,
Volume 108, March 2nd 1895, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH ***

***** This file should be named 45093.txt or 45093.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/0/9/45093/

Produced by Punch, or the London Charivari, Lisa Tang,
Malcolm Farmer and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

