The Project Gutenberg EBook of Patience, by James W. Alexander

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Patience

Author: James W. Alexander

Release Date: May 2, 2014 [EBook #45564]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PATIENCE ***




Produced by Carlos Colón, Princeton Theological Seminary
Library and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)









  Transcriber's Notes:

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Small uppercase have been replaced with regular uppercase.

  Blank pages have been eliminated.

  Variations in spelling and hyphenation have been left as in the
  original.




  PATIENCE.


  BY

  JAMES W. ALEXANDER, D. D.


  "Let patience have her perfect work."--James i. 4.


  PHILADELPHIA:
  PRESBYTERIAN BOARD OF PUBLICATION,
  No. 265 CHESTNUT STREET.




  Entered according to the Act of Congress in the year 1852, by

  ALEXANDER W. MITCHELL, M. D.

  In the office of the Clerk of the District Court for the
  Eastern District of Pennsylvania.




ADVERTISEMENT.


The following meditations on Patience, though once delivered in
substance to a Christian assembly, were written as a pastoral gift to an
esteemed friend, who had been more than two years confined to her
dwelling by a dangerous, lingering, and sometimes exceedingly painful
malady. May the good Lord carry his truth with a blessing to other
chambers of trial!




PATIENCE.


Some words which are often in our mouths are, nevertheless, but little
understood; and some virtues which we are continually praising, are
hardly ever put in practice. This is as true of patience as of any thing
else. Every man needs it, every man knows he would be the better for it,
yet every man falls short of it. This, I suppose, was one reason why the
apostle James teaches so emphatically concerning it,

     "Let patience have her perfect work." James i. 4.

It would seem that the "twelve tribes scattered abroad," to whom this
apostle wrote, were in trials and needed comfort. For the very first
words of his letter are as if he stood over them and said, _Be of good
cheer!_ "My brethren," says he, "count it all joy, when ye fall into
divers temptations," _i. e._, _trials_. These troubles tried their faith
(v. 3,) and "untried faith is uncertain faith." The result of these
trials of faith is _patience_. The very word is derived from
"suffering,"[1] and if there were no pain there could be no patience. If
then patience is good, trials are good. And the great caution to be
observed under such dispensations is, that we lose not the fulness of
the benefit; that we content not ourselves with half the mercy; that we
stop not short of the entire grace; for we may suffer and yet not
profit; therefore, says the inspired teacher, "Let patience have her
_perfect work_."

     [1] In Latin _patientia_, from _patior_.

I. _Patience_ is a certain temper of mind under suffering. As we all are
appointed to suffer, and some of us to suffer greatly and suffer long,
we should do well to learn more of this heavenly art, concerning which
so much good is spoken in Scripture.

In its simplest form, patience is a calm and unshaken state of mind,
strongly bearing up against a present burden of distress. This may exist
without religion. A Stoic or a western savage may endure pain without a
murmur. Malefactors have stoutly faced the torments of their penal
death. In respect to this, the natural temperament of human beings
differs. Some can naturally bear more than others. They have more rigid
fibre, or less shrinking nerves, more robust health, or smaller
sensibility. The degree of pain is to be measured, not by the force of
the blow, but the power of resistance. That which would crush a reed
shall leave no mark upon an oak. When pain comes, however, it is well if
we have even natural means of enduring it. But practice, discipline, and
exercise add vastly even to this natural fortitude. Fresh soldiers and
new recruits quail and fly, but the veteran has looked death in the
face. He who has endured once, can endure again. Still more efficacious
is the operation of inward principle, adding moral motives to the barely
natural power. Education has this for part of its work, to teach the
young to bear some burdens, not to fall back at every alarm, nor cry out
at every pang. Stern determination will help one to sustain what might
at first have seemed intolerable. This is remarkably the case in great
and sudden pangs of anguish, for which a resolved mind has prepared
itself.

Though pains of mind are worse than pains of body, they also may be
endured by some with hardihood and tranquillity, and this we call
fortitude, and in some circumstances patience. By great skill and
self-control in managing the thoughts and detaching the attention from
distressing objects, some are able, to a degree which at first might
seem impracticable, to keep up quietude, self-possession, and even a
show of cheerfulness, under complicated bereavements, mortifications,
and griefs. All this may enter into the Christian's patience; but all
this falls infinitely short of its "perfect work."

_Christian patience_ adds to this a sweet, childlike resignation to
God's holy will, in the affliction, whatever it may be. All merely
natural or philosophical patience is cold, gloomy, sullen, and
unprofitable. Though it may refrain from tears, it cannot smile; for it
hath no faith, no love, no Saviour, no covenant, no God! Christian
patience "endures, as seeing Him who is invisible;" that is faith. Heb.
xi. 1. It looks up to the rod in the hand of a chastening Father. Heb.
xii. 6. It considers One that endured such contradiction against
himself, and arms itself with the same mind. 1 Pet. iv. 1. It beholds
every pang disposed according to a covenant transaction. 1 Cor. iii. 22,
23. And it bows to all, however distressing, as ordered by the infinite
wisdom, justice, and goodness. Lam. iii. 37-40. Therefore it is, that
the stoutest and hardest of worldly sufferers falls so far below the
feeblest of Christ's lambs, when laid under heavy trials. Though pangs
of anguish must now and then extort a sigh, tear, or groan, the child
of God still turns to him, when smitten, and kisses the paternal hand.
It is again _faith_, believing that God doth it, and that all he doth is
wisest and is best. It is _submission_, yielding the neck to the yoke
(Lam. iii. 27), bowing down under the Omnipotent hand, (1 Pet. v. 6),
and prostrating itself beneath the infinite and eternal will, (Gen.
xviii. 25.) It is _resignation_, giving the whole matter into the best
hands, that He may undertake, (Isa. xxxviii. 14), and undoubtingly
referring every future event unto the God of the lilies and the birds.
Matt. vi. 26. It is _humility_, owning itself little, and dependent, and
mean, and unworthy, and therefore willing to suffer. And it is
_penitence_, bewailing sin, pleading for mercy, wondering that it
suffers so little, and remembering how light are these pains compared
with the agonies of the lost, or the vicarious sorrows of the Lord our
righteousness. All this, and much more, is present in every case of
truly sanctified Christian affliction; and this sheds a light through
the curtains of evangelical sorrow, which is altogether unknown to the
most resolute of stoical heroes.

There is a third consideration, not to be omitted in our study of
Christian patience. The word, as said above, implies _suffering_ and
_endurance_, but it includes another idea. It has reference to _time_.
It is not barely willingness to _suffer_, but willingness to suffer
_more_. Nature would not wait a moment; it would be delivered _now_.
Grace leaves all to God, and says, "My times are in his hand!" Though
the succour tarry, patience can wait. Hab. ii. 3. What grace is this,
thus added to faith and love? Is it not HOPE, the sister grace, that
abideth? 1 Cor. xiii. 13. Leaning on her anchor, hope looks out from her
post of observation, casting the eye over a waste of billows, and
sweeping that dim horizon where as yet no sail twinkles along the
distant line that unites the sea and sky, but sure that though weeping
may endure for a night, joy cometh in the morning. Psa. xxx. 5. He that
hath been with her in six troubles, in the seventh will not forsake her.
Job v. 19. Here is a blessed pillow for the languid aching head, a cool
refreshment for the throbbing temple. Here is a secret cordial which has
enabled many a child of sorrow to bear the heavy load; when tribulation
worketh _patience_. Rom. v. 3. This hope is more than empty conjecture
or vague expectation. It is firm; it is fixed. Its hold is above. It
seizes on words of promise and of covenant. It is sustaining itself by
the arm of the mighty Saviour. Its spiritual cable grapples that which
is within the veil (Heb. vi. 19), and hence it maketh not ashamed. Rom.
v. 5.

If it were God's way to send on his children only such trials as are
pungent, quick, and brief, however severe, the test of patience would be
incomplete; but sometimes his rod lies long, and the soul is made to cry
out, "Thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presseth me sore!"
Psa. xxxviii. 2. "How long wilt thou forget me, Lord?" Psa. xiii. 1. The
very working of the remedy depends on this withholding of immediate
cure. Yet the believing child learns to think and feel that God's time
is best, and is assured that "He doth not afflict willingly, nor grieve
the children of men." Lam. iii. 33. And hope opens the window, and even
though no dry land as yet appears, welcomes the olive branch borne by
the dove of promise. Gen. viii. 10, 11. Deep may call unto deep. Psa.
xlii. 7. "Yet the Lord will command his loving-kindness in the day-time,
and in the night his song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God
of my life." (verse 8.) "My soul, wait thou only upon God!" Psa. lxii.
5. Thus she cheers the night-watches, and in the multitude of her
thoughts within her, God's comforts delight her soul. Psa. xciv. 19. The
experience of the psalmist is made for such times of languishing. Many a
solitary one has renewed the strain of David's pensive chord, and sung
with plaintive note, "I am shut up, and I cannot come forth. Mine eye
mourneth by reason of affliction. Lord, I have called daily upon thee,
I have stretched out my hands unto thee." Psa. lxxxviii. 8, 9. The night
wears heavily away; the stars in their courses shine dimly; no streak of
eastern dawning betokens day. Yet the hopeful sufferer can say, "I wait
for the Lord, my soul doth wait, and in his word do I hope; my soul
waiteth for the Lord, more than they that watch for the morning; I say,
more than they that watch for the morning." Psa. cxxx. 5, 6. And
patience, not worn out with waiting, turns on its pillow, and breathes
itself to God, saying, "My soul is even as a weaned child." Psa. cxxxi.
2.

It would not be difficult to fill up the whole tract with an account of
those different circumstances of a human creature in which he must
exercise this Christian virtue. But those to whom such details would be
applicable are the very persons who need no prompter; they know what
their distresses are. It is much more important to observe, that there
is no kind or degree of suffering which our Heavenly Father ordains,
under which we may not exercise patience, and, therefore, as every human
being is born to suffer, there is not a single reader to whom this
lesson is not important, however much he may think the contrary, in the
pride and self-sufficiency of youth, or health, or fortune, or good
spirits. And though certain persons in our fastidious generation grow
intensely weary, when time is bestowed in sustaining and comforting the
broken-hearted--let such know, that _their_ time is coming, and that
even if now they have their "good things," and think their "mountain
stands strong," they shall yet live to behold the day in which they must
have a stock and habit, yea a _grace_ of patience, or sink into extreme
despondency, if not despair.

In one view the suffering life of many Christians, and those the best,
is hard to understand, for it seems at war not only with God's fatherly
goodness, but with his gracious covenant. (Read Jer. xii. 12, and Psa.
lxxiii.) But we must never lose our hold of two cardinal pillars, the
very Jachin and Boaz of our temple: (1) that happiness in this world is
not the chief good; the affirming of which is the radical error of all
the common public economy, and much of the philanthropy of the day; and
(2) that the education, or discipline, or training, or perfecting of a
soul is so great and divine a work, that it is worth a lifetime of
distress; so that no redeemed saint will look back on the longest
sufferings of the present life as more than the scarcely perceptible
moment before an eternity of holy delight. Angels look down and see poor
sin-wounded creatures fighting against their chief medicine. As has been
said, God does not afflict nor grieve the children of men "willingly,"
arbitrarily, out of any love to see them suffer, or any indifference to
their sorrows; but with a wise and definite end, which will be revealed
hereafter. The entire process of Christian endurance, pain-bearing, or
patience, from beginning to end, in all its connection of parts, is more
deeply interesting to one who could read it, than any drama ever enacted
on the stage. So it will one day appear, when not only the particular
sufferer, but all the company of God's elect in heaven, shall look back
and see many a mystery of providence resolved. They will rise to higher
admiration of the divine plan, when they shall be instructed why Joseph
had his youth oppressed by cruelty, exile and imprisonment; why David
was a persecuted fugitive, and a bereaved father; why the apostles were
as sheep appointed to the slaughter; why the early Christians were mowed
down by the sword; and why to this day they that will live godly suffer
persecution. They will recall ten thousand cases, (for eternity has
neither limits nor weariness,) in which some of the best of men have
lain under pangs, or in languishing from sore diseases; or journeyed
through a valley of gloom and depression; or been marks for arrows from
the bow of wicked fellow-creatures, and more malignant demons; and why
others, with hearts sickened by hope deferred, waited years and almost
lifetimes without seeing the accomplishment of their strongest desires.
When these several circles are complete, and every covering removed, and
God's light thrown on dark places of the spiritual temple, it will
appear, that this very divine product, to wit, _holy patience_, has been
as dear to the great Architect of the Church, as is the costliest
sculpture to the most devoted enthusiast in art. And therefore we are
exhorted not merely to have patience, but to let patience have her
_perfect work_.

II. The _perfect work_ of patience is plainly nothing less than the full
and thorough carrying out of patience, with unfaltering strength of
soul, in every kind and measure of trial, unto the very end. Death
closes all trials of the believer; but until death he is to have his
armour on. There may be some reality of true Christian patience, and yet
it may be very weak. We must learn to bear up bravely, and with the
putting forth of a complete manful energy. Small encounters are useful
to the raw recruit; they exercise him in the virtues which in process of
time make him a soldier. He that bearded the lion and bear, afterwards
accepted the challenge of Goliath, though still a ruddy youth. Could we
look on daily troubles, as exercises set us by the Master, to fit us for
the higher efforts of patience, we should be saved much repining and
many groans. The great duty is always the duty of the day, of the hour,
of this moment. If our equanimity is destroyed by the trifles of a life
generally prosperous--what can we expect of ourselves, in the
water-floods of tribulation which may yet roll in? Jer. xii. 5. Let us
learn to bear with a hard hand on the helm, before the tempest arises.
Under the sense of God's supreme governance and paternal love, and in
expectation of reward and rest hereafter, let us bow ourselves to the
sovereign disposal; bearing all that God sends, and Christ our Mediator
concurs in, with a yielding, filial, believing soul.

Patience may be said to have its perfect work, when it withstands a
great, sudden and extraordinary affliction without being shaken.
Uncommon faith is necessary for such an exercise as this. Indeed who has
not cause to join in the prayer, _Lead us not into temptation!_ Strong
Christians are the persons to whom this forefront of the battle is
reserved; to them "it is _given_ in the behalf of Christ, not only to
believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake." Phil. i. 29. It is
_Job_, the "perfect man," who is carried through the unexampled
conflict. And the early believers to whom James addressed the words of
the text, were exposed to evils such as happily we know nothing of. Yet
they needed the exhortation.

Patience has its perfect work, when it does not give way but holds out,
however long may be the trial. Even weakness may sustain a momentary
attack, and pungent anguish may be borne, if it be soon over. But to
have day after day of pain, and night after night of fearful watching;
to lie down heavy, yet hoping for no alleviation in the morning; to be
wounded again and again, and find increasing years bring new losses and
deeper sorrows;--this has been the lot of some who were God's children,
and concerning whom it might well be said, that though the outer man
perished, the inner man was renewed day by day. No man can number the
cases of hopeless disease, tending incurably to certain and painful
death, which occur in every age, and that among true believers. Christ's
confessors have, in more periods of the church than one, spent large
parts of their best years in prison. Millions have borne all the
complicated ills of poverty all their days. And those who have survived
to old age, have found it often one long disease. All these have had
"need of patience," and would not have experienced its perfect work, if
they had fainted in the day of adversity. I can never forget a Christian
woman, eminent for spiritual joys, who was confined to her bed, with a
wasting and at times excruciating disease, for about twenty years. Let
not frivolous or superficial professors flatter themselves that those
fair-weather graces which they boast of now, will stand them in stead
when long storms begin to howl. Unusual supports from the very hand of
the Spirit are necessary, against such conjunctures; and which of us can
be certain that such shall not befall himself?

Patience has a _perfect work_, when it grows to be an _abiding habit of
the soul_. This cannot be, except by repeated acts of faith, submission
and hope, reiterated till they are like a second nature. Such endurance
rests on settled principle, and is an eminent work of the Holy Spirit.
There are few more noble characters we can give of any, than when we say
of a believer, _He is habitually patient_. The character is rare, but we
are invited to attain it.

Whether the words of the apostle be considered as a command or an
entreaty, they equally imply that there was some effort to be put
forth. Let patience have her perfect work. "Place yourselves in the
posture of being thoroughly and imperturbably constant even to the close
of your mortal struggle." This enjoins the forbearance of whatever is
contrary to the meek and patient spirit, and the acquisition,
preservation and increase of every good gift which is favourable to it;
for instance, humility, sense of sin, godly sorrow and shame, thirst for
holiness, faith, hope, courage, love and joy. Indeed patience has its
perfect work, only where all sister graces are carried forward with
symmetrical increase; and whenever one of these is nourished into new
strength, it contributes so much to the solid habit of Christian
patience.

III. Let us consider some of the _motives_ to let patience have her
perfect work.

1. _This is a virtue which is needed every day._ Some excellencies of
the soul are called out only by great emergencies, but the world in
which we live is so beset with vexations that there is not a day, there
is scarcely an hour, in which we are not called to be patient. The
little events of domestic life, connected with ordinary labour and
service, give the cumbered and troubled Martha as keen anguish as is
felt by the general of an army or the ruler of a state, from defeats and
revolutions. The inward grace required must not be measured by the
apparent magnitude of the burden, but the strength of the sustainer.
Spirits above perhaps look down on princes contending about the crown of
an empire, with as much contempt as we bestow on infants fighting for a
straw. But trials are not all equal. Sometimes, as we have seen,
vehement surges of affliction break in; and we know not on what day this
may occur; hence we must be ready every day. All the days of our life we
are going over one and the same course of Christian duty, viz.,
submitting our own selfish will to the will of God.

2. _Increase of patience is increase of happiness._ Though present
happiness is not the great object of life, it is one of the effects of
religion, to which we cannot be indifferent. And what is very
remarkable, there is not a single religious act, which does not increase
our happiness. Properly understood, the whole moral law, whether at
Sinai or the mount of the Beatitudes, utters this one commandment, BE
HAPPY! What is thus true of holiness in general is eminently true of
this mode of it in particular. Pain almost ceases to be pain, to a mind
that fully yields itself to God. That this is true in a much higher
sense than ordinary Christians suppose, is apparent in the case of the
martyrs; (Heb. xi. 32-49,) and we have known instances in common life
where the most horrible maladies, almost unmanning mere spectators, have
been borne with equanimity and even cheerfulness, by disciples of
Christ. Patience disarms affliction. If the patience were perfect, the
suffering would be annihilated, as to its effect on happiness. The
reason why true Christians sometimes endure great distresses before
entire relief comes, is not that patience is an insufficient antidote,
but that they have not patience enough. And here observe a striking
difference between the stoical hardness of a worldly mind, and the
sacred endowment which we are endeavouring to recommend. A stout hearted
unbeliever will now and then appear absolutely unshrinking under
trials, such as bodily pains, calumny, loss of children, hatred and
enmity of fellow-creatures; but his shield is _insensibility_. He has
made the surface callous. And in so doing he has stopped up the avenues
as well of pleasure as of pain. He has diminished his sorrows without
increasing his joys. Now observe how opposite the case of Christ's
disciple. He suffers too, and triumphs in suffering, but not by
insensibility. He feels the wound. The thrill of a poignant infliction
runs through his quick and sentient nerve to the centre of feeling, as
nimbly as in the most inconsolable and maddened unbeliever. He is not
stupefied; he is not seared; his temperament of genuine humanity is all
alive to grief; but it is also alive to joy. And that joy God pours in,
so that he glories in tribulation also. _Religion_, which has made his
susceptibilities more tender, opens new access for refined pleasures.
For loss, he finds indemnity; and for pain and woe, a spiritual faith
and hope, love and joy, which overcome and absorb them. Patience in such
an advanced experience is no longer unfeeling acquiescence, but a
swallowing up of man's will in the will of God. What abundant reason
have we, in this valley of tears and tombs, to strive that patience may
have her perfect work!

3. _Obedience to the requisition of the text conduces to true greatness
of character._ Religion, properly understood, is nothing else than a
restitution begun, of humanity to its perfect condition.

To be without religion is to be curtailed of the dimensions of man's
character. Every state of mind and heart which religion commands is
just so far a return to spiritual health. No human soul can be truly
great while ignorant of God, alienated from God, opposed to God,
slavishly in dread of God, and out of communion with God. Each grace of
the Holy Spirit tends to lift man up towards the ideal of humanity. The
trials of life bring all men into a certain conflict with adverse
circumstances, producing pain. In this conflict many are conquered. But
the Christian combatant finds every trial an occasion for bringing out
latent reserves of a strength derived from Christ his Head. When he
suffers therefore sharply and long, he is only like a soldier going from
one battle to another, and waxing hardier and more courageous after each
success. Hear how Paul, long tried in this athletic effort, expresses
this Christian magnanimity, (1 Cor. ix. 25,) "I therefore run, not as
uncertainly; so fight I, not as one that beateth the air." And "Fight
the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life." There is reason to
believe, that no great Christian character can be developed without some
severe discipline, that is, without patience, in its large and
scriptural sense.

4. _Confirmed patience tends to usefulness in the Church._ The very
reverse is often thought by the sufferer himself, especially if his
trial throws him into solitude, poverty, contempt of brethren, weakness
of body, pains of old age, or separation from friends. In the chamber of
melancholy seclusion how many a soul has mourned that all opportunity of
doing any thing for Christ was cut off. But this is a short-sighted and
defective conclusion. When God's infinitely wise and holy will is done,
then the great end of our creation, and our redemption, and our
sanctification is accomplished, so far as we are concerned; whether it
be by doing or by suffering. If it were possible for a perfectly sinless
angel to be perpetually bathed in sorrow by the will of God, the pure
spirit would accept the coming trial with a yielding bliss. And when the
perfectly sinless Jesus, who was "very man," sank in griefs which
surpass comprehension, he was accomplishing the purposes of the Godhead,
and said, "Not my will, but thine be done." Now by sending trials and
educing the grace of patience in repeated acts, God fits the soul for
labours incalculably beyond every thing it could have effected without
this education. And these very pains, and the conduct of a believer
under them, becoming visible to bystanders and fellow-servants, as well
as to the ungodly themselves, go up as a costly odour, to magnify the
grace of the gospel. So that no sermons ever preached so loudly as the
transient view of a suffering saint has sometimes done, when in the
fiery heart of the hot furnace, he has been seen unhurt, with one like
unto the Son of God. (Dan. iii. 25.) In both ways, therefore, by
preparing for action, and by exhibiting the glory of grace, patience
tends to benefit the Church.

5. Finally. _Patience when duly sustained leads to a great reward._ Not
in the sense of the Papists, who strike a commercial balance between
pains and recompense, and set off so much trouble in this life against
so much merited blessing in the life to come. But in perfect consistency
with our belief that after all is done we are unprofitable servants,
that all heavenly good is merited by our Saviour, and not by us, and
that a man may suffer pain here which shall be swallowed up in greater
pains hereafter, we maintain and teach, that in the case of true
believer, the gracious deportment of the soul under earthly affliction
carries it forward to higher happiness than it would otherwise have
reached. "For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." By the work of
God's Spirit, the soul that suffers receives greater capacity for
eventual joy. Whoso bears God's burdens in a godly manner is made
holier, and more fit and able to take in the surpassing blessedness of
rest. And then our heavenly Father, who seeth not as man seeth, does not
measure our obedience on a physical scale, by the amount and number of
sensible acts, as if he reckoned up so many deeds outwardly done, so
many palpable effects produced, so many words spoken; but by the quality
of the inward affection and will, which may be heavenward and holy, and
infinitely pleasing to God, in a poor creature locked in a dungeon, or
motionless on a bed of illness. Where the soul _pleases God_, there the
great work of life is accomplished; in an apostolic discourse or
miracle, in a gift of charity, in a resistance of temptation, or in
agony on a cross.

Patience, heavenly patience, under what God inflicts, is more pleasing
to him than thousands of rams, and ten thousands of rivers of oil; which
is of itself the all-comprehensive motive to pious submission and
endurance. But what is pleasing to God, as the fruit of his Holy Spirit,
God will graciously reward. "I know thy works," saith he to Ephesus,
"and thy labour and thy patience." "I know thy works," saith he to
Thyatira, "and charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience."
"Because," saith he to Philadelphia, "thou hast kept the word of my
patience, I also will keep thee." "Behold," saith he to Smyrna, "the
devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye
shall have tribulation ten days. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will
give thee a crown of life!" May I not add with renewed emphasis the
exhortation of our apostle, though it struck strangely on the ear at
first, "My brethren, count it all joy, when ye fall into divers
temptations; knowing this that the trying of your faith worketh
patience." O my brother--my sister--more patience will make us more like
Christ. What are our sufferings to his! Meditate, step by step, on the
degrees of his humiliation, accompanying Him whom your souls love, from
point to point of his unexampled sorrows; and thus will you find sin
grow more intolerable, and suffering more light.


THE END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Patience, by James W. Alexander

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PATIENCE ***

***** This file should be named 45564.txt or 45564.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/5/6/45564/

Produced by Carlos Colón, Princeton Theological Seminary
Library and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
