The Project Gutenberg eBook, History of Company K of the 140th Regiment
Pennsylvania Volunteers (1862-'65), by Benjamin F. Powelson and Alexander
Sweeney


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: History of Company K of the 140th Regiment Pennsylvania Volunteers (1862-'65)


Author: Benjamin F. Powelson and Alexander Sweeney



Release Date: May 10, 2014  [eBook #45626]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF COMPANY K OF THE 140TH
REGIMENT PENNSYLVANIA VOLUNTEERS (1862-'65)***


E-text prepared by the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 45626-h.htm or 45626-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/45626/45626-h/45626-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/45626/45626-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/historyofcompany00powe


Transcriber's note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).





HISTORY OF COMPANY K OF THE 140TH REGIMENT PENNSYLVANIA VOLUNTEERS.
(1862-'65.)

by

B. F. POWELSON,

(First Sergeant for Over Two Years.)

Under the Direction of

BREVET CAPT. ALECK SWEENEY

And with the Co-operation of Others of the Company.







Steubenville, Ohio:
The Carnahan Printing Company.
1906.




DEDICATION.


This little volume is, with loving remembrances and in truest
affection, dedicated to the memory of Company K's dead and living,
whose worth as volunteer soldiers, whose courage, devotion, fidelity,
sacrifice, valor and efficiency were proven in many a long and
difficult march, and in many a hard-fought battle, as well as by
their return, when the glorious work of preserving the Union had
been accomplished, to the pursuit of commendable avocations in days
of peace and prosperity, worthy indeed of the honor a grateful nation
accords them, as an integral part of the color-guard of its patriotism.

  [Illustration: Late Photo of B. F. POWELSON

   The Company Historian]




PREFACE.


The bulk of what is contained in this book was written with a view to
its forming a part of a book of the History of the 140th Regiment of
Pennsylvania Volunteers. At the annual reunion of this regiment at
Beaver, Pa., in 1903, it was decided to issue such a book of history
under a regimental historian, with each company furnishing its
individual part thereto, in such facts as pertained to any separate
part as played in that dreadful war drama by a company, part of a
company, or by an individual therein. This was in accord with an
expressed demand for the placing of the regiment's heroic deeds and
illustrious works in heroic record, so that the soldier's friends and
successors may ever have these before them, an inspiration and
incentive to the continued progress of their country, through a
faithful, devoted, loyal citizenship.

But after more than two years have elapsed, it is found that but few
companies have done their work and no one has been secured to serve
for the regiment. And as Co. K. has for some time practically had its
work done, and as much time and means have been required, and there is
danger through death or other untoward event that what has been done
may be lost, the company has concluded to publish a book for itself,
and to give a copy of this book to the regiment, so as thus to provide
Co. K's part to the history of the regiment, whenever the Book of
History, as at first proposed, can be issued. The earnest desire of our
company is that the Regimental History will yet be issued, and it
stands ready still to do its part towards the same.

B. F. POWELSON.

Boulder, Colo., January 2, 1906.




CONTENTS:


1. Dedication                                          2

2. Preface                                             3

3. Cursory Statement Concerning the Regiment           5

4. General History of the Company                     10

5. Sketches of Those Who Have Died Since the War      46

6. Sketches of Those Living                           57

7. Recapitulation of Battles, Casualties, Etc.        72

8. Conclusion                                         77




Cursory Statement Concerning the Regiment.


It seems fitting that a cursory view be taken of the services performed
by the Regiment so that what is written as the History of Co. K may be
understood and not seem to be too much isolated. Perhaps this can be
subserved by a swift following of the itinerancy of the Regiment, by
giving the list of, and some reference to the battles and skirmishes
fought, and by a summary of casualties.

Among the many organizations in Pennsylvania volunteer soldiery during
the Civil War, none stood higher in efficiency in service or brilliancy
in record than the One Hundred and Fortieth Regiment, five companies of
which were recruited in Washington county, three in Beaver, one in
Mercer and one in Greene. Col. R. P. Roberts, of Beaver, killed at
Gettysburg, was its first Colonel. W. S. Shallenberger, now Second
Assistant Postmaster General, was its efficient Adjutant. This Regiment
is accredited with the highest per cent of casualties in action of all
the regiments enlisted in Pennsylvania. It stands fourth in this
respect in the entire army during that fearful war in the '60s.

Upon its organization, at Harrisburg, Sept. 8, 1862, the Regiment was
stationed for three months on the Northern Central R.R. with
headquarters at Parkton, Md. And there, while on important guard duty,
it was carefully drilled and schooled for military service. Then the
Regiment, on Dec. 10, '62, was ordered to the front. On the evening of
Dec. 13th, it marched out of Washington, D.C., crossing bridge over
East Branch. The route was on the Maryland side, through Piscataway to
Liverpool Point, from which we crossed on a transport vessel to Aquia
Creek landing, and thence we marched to Falmouth, Va. One week was
consumed in the marching, and the Regiment stood well the test. Then
into winter quarters, an integral part of the Army of the Potomac. The
Regiment is assigned to Col. Zook's Brigade, Gen. Hancock's Division,
and in Maj.-Gen. Sumner's Right Grand Division.

The Regiment had its baptism of blood in the Battle of
Chancellorsville, May 1-5, '63, withstanding the trying ordeal well.
Back in camp, near Falmouth, the Regiment was skillfully trimmed and
equipped for greater service. It was to have place ever after in a
Corps, whose record was most brilliant, the Second, under command of
the gallant Gen. Hancock. This Corps had in it six of the nine
regiments sustaining the greatest numerical loss in killed during the
war, aggregating 1848 out of the 2674 killed in the nine regiments. The
Regiment was in the First Division, Gen. Caldwell commanding, with Gen.
Barlow as his successor; and in the 3rd Brigade, Brig.-Gen. Zook
commanding. He being killed at Gettysburg, Gen. Miles came in command
of the Brigade. In the long and exciting march to Gettysburg,
Centerville, Gainsville, Edward's Ferry, the Monocacy and Uniontown,
Md., were important points. Uniontown was reached by forced
march--fully 35 miles--by whole Corps in a day; and our Brigade, on
July 1st, was rear-guard for wagon train, most of the 30 miles to
Gettysburg being made in the night, and, exhausted, we went on the
battle line on left center. Eloquent and pathetic was the record of the
140th at Gettysburg. The immediate casualties in the Regiment in the
fighting on the evening of July 2, '63, amounted to about 60 per cent
of the number engaged, our Lieutenant Colonel, John Fraser, being by
rank in command of Brigade through balance of the conflict at
Gettysburg. Col. Roberts was shot while in front of the Regiment to
direct it to change of position to check, if possible, the column of
the enemy flanking our right. Disastrous as was the loss of our brave
Colonel at such a time, the Regiment faltered not but held its place
till ordered out. The Regiment participated in the attempt to intercept
Gen. Lee before he could recross the Potomac, the route taken being
through Frederick City, reaching Burkittsville July 8th. Near the
vicinity of Williamsport we came in touch with the enemy, and on the
14th, near Falling Water, we took part in engagement with the rebel
rear-guard, a goodly number of them being captured. Thence our route
led us to Harper's Ferry, across on 18th to Loudon Valley, through
Hillsboro, to Snicker's Gap, to Bloomfield to Ashby Gap, where we had
skirmishing, July 22nd; then passing to Linden and east along railroad
to White Plains, and southward to Warrenton, in the vicinity of which
the command remained several days, and, passing on, reached Morrisville
July 31st. Participated in the reconnaissance-in-force at the U.S.
Ford, Aug. 31st-Sept. 4th, returning to Morrisville. Crossed over the
Rappahannock Sept. 12th; engaged the enemy at Culpepper C.H.; pressed
on to the Rapidan, southwest of Culpepper, by the 17th, where
considerable maneuvering, fortifying and fighting were done, until the
early days of October, when a retrograde movement began. October 11th
found the Regiment near Bealton Station, north of the Rappahannock.
Again the evening of the 12th found us well into the open country south
of the river; and a great demonstration was made by campfires, bands,
etc. But to no purpose, for Lee seemed bent on an attempt to dash into
Washington. So all night we tramp, crossing the river for the third
time. Taking the flank of army, we pass to Auburn Creek, sometime in
the night of 13th, in touch with the enemy most of time. Early morning
of 14th came the engagement on Auburn Hill, our Regiment being in
rear-guard of the Corps. Over to Catlett's Station by noon; then on a
run to Bristor's Station, where we fought all afternoon, winning a neat
victory. Thence to Bull Run, and to Centerville by daylight 15th. Lee
foiled, and so returns southward. In a few days we follow. In vicinity
of Fayetteville several days are spent. Extensive drilling done. The
7th of November finds the Regiment near the Rappahannock, east of the
O. & A. R.R. The 8th we are at Thoms, south of the river, where we
remain till Nov. 24th. Then came the noted movement across the cold
Rapidan, and the Mine Run engagement, Nov. 29-30, with its varied
experiences and rigorous exposures, and return to north side, and going
into winter quarters at Stevensburg Dec. 7th. On Feb. 6, '64, the
Regiment took part in the reconnaissance-in-force at Morton's Ford on
Rapidan.

May 3rd found the whole army on the move. The Regiment, crossing the
Rapidan at Ely's Ford, plunged into the Wilderness, and at once found
the Johnnies plentiful, but held them level. In battle of Todd's Tavern
May 8th. Engaged the enemy on 10th and 11th west and southwest of
Spottsylvania C.H. Then came the march in dark and rainy night, and at
earliest dawn on the 12th that most brilliant charge of whole Corps and
wholesale capture of the garrison of the salient. Here the 140th lost
52 in killed, while at Gettysburg the killed numbered 61.

In this charge Gen. N. A. Miles had command of the 1st Brigade, 1st
Division. The 140th was a part of this Brigade, and of the Regiment he
then and ever after spoke well. Gen. Miles, the lines having been
formed for the charge, sent his horse to the rear, and, placing himself
at the head of the Brigade, led it in the charge. And he and members of
his staff testify that the 140th was the first Regiment to enter the
rebel works. And we deem it worthy to be here recorded that, when the
Second Corps marched back through the vicinity of this battle, after
the surrender of Lee, Gen. Miles claimed the stump of the tree, cut
down by the dreadful rain of the missiles of war in that "bloody angle"
at Spottsylvania, and took it. And Capt. Sweeney, then on his staff, by
order conveyed it to Washington and turned it over to Secretary Stanton
with Gen. Miles' compliments. This stump is now encased in glass among
the war relics at Washington City.

Grant's "fighting it out on that line" took the Regiment on through
Bowling Green, Milford, to North Anna river, and across it, where the
enemy is given battle, near Hanover Junction, May 23-26. River is
re-crossed for another flank movement, and the 140th plods on to near
Hanovertown, where again it crosses the river, and at Totopotomy Creek
engages the enemy, May 29-31, where the brave McCollough, commanding,
fell. At Cold Harbor for days the fight goes on, and the 140th suffers
many casualties. Then Grant chose to plant his army south of the James,
and on June 13th the Regiment crossed the Chicahoming at Jones' Bridge,
and with some skirmishing about Charles City found itself on the 14th
south of the James; and on the 15th was in the engagement in front of
Petersburg. We held position for a while on the Jerusalem plank road.
On July 27th occurred our engagement with the enemy at Deep Bottom,
north side of the James. Then the return to a place in the line east of
Petersburg, where we wrought much on the defenses. Again, on Aug. 12th,
via City Point and transports, the 140th finds itself in Deep Bottom,
and fought the enemy on the flank, while the 5th Corps broke the
enemy's grip on the Weldon R.R. Then withdrawing in a tedious night
march we get back to our camp. But we set out at once south along the
Weldon R.R. till we reach Ream's Station. There miles of track are
destroyed. A. P. Hill's Corps appear to drive us off. A sharp conflict
wages through afternoon of Aug. 25th. In the shades we stole back and
took position on the railroad south of Petersburg and fortify. In that
position the fall and winter are spent, with occasional diversions.
There was the engagement at Hatcher's Run latter part of October,
another one Dec. 10th, and the Dabney's Mill on Feb. 6th, '65, constant
vigilance not allowing the enemy any rest.

The final campaign opening, the 140th was constantly in touch with the
enemy from March 25th till Lee's surrender, the special engagements
being at Sutherland Station April 2nd; Jetersville, the 5th; Sailor's
Creek, 6th; and Farmville, the 7th. The route was directly on line of
retreat of Lee's army. The 140th was on skirmish line covering road
into Appomattox C.H. the morning of April 9th, the time of the
surrender of the Army of Virginia.

The Regiment encamped at Burkville from April 13th to April 30th.
Was at Amelia C.H., May 2nd. And, passing through Richmond and on
through Fredericksburg, the 140th ended its long route of marching
at Washington, D.C., May 23, '65, from which it had set out Dec. 13,
'62, having marched an aggregate of 1108 miles, and having taken
part in 22 distinct battles, nine marked skirmishes and several
reconnaissances-in-force. The battles were in duration from six hours
to five days. With a total enrollment of 1132, 198 were killed in
action and 128 died in service. The wounded numbered 537. The total
casualties were about 850. There were present at the muster-out on May
31, '65, 295.

On the disbanding of the Regiment, its citizen soldiery again took
their places in institutions of learning, offices, shops, stores, or on
farms, or represented their constituents in places of trust, content
that they had done their duty in saving the country, and rejoicing in
seeing it rise in worth and influence to highest rank among the nations
of the world.




General History of Company K.


Company K's special part of this History of the 140th Regiment, P.V.,
is furnished by Ben. F. Powelson, who was Orderly Sergeant of the
Company for over two years, under the direction of First Lieut. Alex.
Sweeney, the only surviving commissioned officer, with his assistance
and the aid and co-operation of other members.

This Company was principally made up of young men from the strenuous
walks of life, out of good Christian homes, largely intelligent sons of
husbandry, and not a few having been or being hard-working students in
academy, college, or theological seminary, thus possessing the
fundamental qualifications for good military service. Possibly it had
as small a ratio of men unfit for such service as any called out to do
duty in the '60s. A few there were, of course, who were carried in by
the tide of excitement or selfish interest, without much consideration,
but most, nearly all of the members, entered through due reflection,
true courage and definite conviction.

Much of K's history will appear in the History of the Regiment, for in
general this company shared with other companies the movements and
service of the Regiment. It is only the purpose of this writing to
treat of what pertains specially to the record of individuals composing
the company and of what was peculiar to the company, or in which it was
affected personally or as a unit of service.

This Company was recruited during the month of August, 1862, in
Washington county, Pa., under the call for 300,000 volunteers. It was
of a composite nature, formed of squads and individuals from different
parts of the county, though the largest constituency was from the
north-western part, with Cross Creek as the center; and in consequence
of this it was frequently called the Cross Creek Company. Wm. A. F.
Stockton, son of the Rev. Dr. John Stockton, pastor of Cross Creek
Presbyterian Church, was engaged sometime in recruiting in this region,
intent on raising a company. He was assisted by B. F. Powelson, his
classmate for years, and by others. Meetings were held in Cross Creek,
Burgettstown, Eldersville, Paris, Candor and other places. One meeting
in Cross Creek Village was attended and addressed by Dr. Wishart and
Messrs. A. and David Acheson, of Washington, the county seat.
Twenty-three enlisted from Cross Creek, the first eleven being sworn in
by 'Squire Duncan on Aug. 16. Those recruited in Paris, in the extreme
northwest section of the county, footed up 20. A squad of seven
enlisted in Candor, under the supervision of Wm. B. Cook. Seven hailed
from the neighborhood of Millsboro, while four others came in from
other places in the eastern part of the county. Claysville furnished a
squad of nine. And quite a number came in from the Finley, Morris and
Donegal Townships. Alex. Sweeney, Jr., had been out in Claysville and
West Alexander in that region on a recruiting tour. He and Enoch Mounts
represented the county seat.

Those recruited in Cross Creek, Eldersville, Paris and Candor, or the
Northwest, fifty-five in number, came together on August 20th at Cross
Creek village, where a large concourse of people assembled and gave
them a hearty repast and reception. Thence, after taking leave of
relatives and friends, they were conveyed by neighbors, in wagons and
other vehicles, sixteen miles to the county seat; and there they for a
while went into camp, using for quarters the halls of the old Fair
Grounds, now the Athletic Grounds of Washington and Jefferson College.
Here all the recruits were rendezvoused, and they were kindly and
patriotically treated by the citizens of Washington, who opened their
homes and in many ways gave comfort and cheer.

On the 22nd of August the formal organization of the Company was
effected, ninety-six entered their names on the Company roll. An
election of officers was held, resulting as follows: Captain, Wm. A. F.
Stockton; First Lieutenant, Alexander Sweeney, Jr.; and Second
Lieutenant, Wm. B. Cook. The non-commissioned officers were in the main
determined upon, Geo. W. McConnell was entered as musician, and the
members of the Company began to assume military airs and were ready for
orders to go forward to active service, and these orders quickly came.
Four other Companies, recruited in Washington county, were known to be
ready for assignment to some Regiment. Orders came for the Company to
proceed at once to Camp Distribution, in old Oakland Fair Grounds near
Pittsburg. The journey to Pittsburg was rather an ovation. The enlisted
were taken in conveyances by way of the old turnpike, many of their
friends accompanying them the whole or part of the way. A halt for
dinner was made at Canonsburg, where the citizens entertained the
Company in royal style. Their loyalty and enthusiasm had a true ring,
for they had a Company ready to go into service. (This Company became
Co. G, of the 140th P.V., and furnished the Lieut. Colonel.) Camp
Distribution was reached without mishap, and there the Company was
partially equipped. And the ninety-six men were mustered into the
service of the United States as Volunteer Infantry, for three years or
during the war, by Capt. Ludington, on the 4th day of September, 1862.

The names and places of residence are as follows:

    No.       Names.                                Residence.

     1. William A. F. Stockton, Captain             Cross Creek
     2. Alexander Sweeney, Jr., First Lieutenant    Washington
     3. William B. Cook, Second Lieutenant          Candor
     4. Benjamin F. Powelson, First Sergeant        Cross Creek
     5. Milton R. Boyd, Second Sergeant             Claysville
     6. Edward S. Alexander, Third Sergeant         West Alexander
     7. Thomas C. Hayes, Fourth Sergeant            Cross Creek
     8. Samuel K. Shindle, Fifth Sergeant           Cross Creek
     9. Silas Cooke, First Corporal                 Cross Creek
    10. John D. McCabe, Second Corporal             Paris
    11. Isaac Donaldson, Third Corporal             Candor
    12. William R. H. Powelson, Fourth Corporal     Cross Creek
    13. George Ralston, Fifth Corporal              Donegal Twp.
    14. William L. Pry, Sixth Corporal              Cross Creek
    15. John F. Gardner, Seventh Corporal           Paris
    16. William Hanlin, Eighth Corporal             Paris
    17. George W. McConnell, Musician               Paris
    18. Allison, James B., Private                  Claysville
    19. Andrews, Abram, Private                     Cross Creek
    20. Andrews, Peter, Private                     Cross Creek
    21. Arthur, James, Private                      Paris
    22. Berryhill, James S., Private                Cross Creek
    23. Briggs, Lazarus, Private                    Dunningsville
    24. Buchanan, Benjamin B., Private              Paris
    25. Butterfoss, Daniel J., Private              Paris
    26. Carter, George W., Private                  Millsboro
    27. Carter, Jesse M., Private                   Millsboro
    28. Carter, Thomas J., Private                  Millsboro
    29. Chester, Andrew, Private                    Dunningsville
    30. Chisholm, Isaac W., Private                 Candor
    31. Cochran, James E., Private                  Paris
    32. Conaway, Ezra, Private                      Millsboro
    33. Corbin, David W., Private                   Cross Creek
    34. Corbin, Joseph A., Private                  Cross Creek
    35. Cummins, Benjamin H., Private               Cross Creek
    36. Daugherty, Michael, Private                 West Alexander
    37. Davis, Andrew B., Private                   Paris
    38. Day, John M., Private                       Morris Twp.
    39. Dickson, Henry, Private                     Dunningsville
    40. Dungan, Robert B., Private                  Cross Creek
    41. Earnest, Benjamin F., Private               Claysville
    42. Fordyce, James H., Private                  Claysville
    43. Frazier, Joseph C., Private                 West Alexander
    44. Fulton, John, Private                       Paris
    45. Gardner, George, Private                    Paris
    46. Geary, William M., Private                  Candor
    47. Golden, Isaac, Private                      West Alexander
    48. Graham, Joseph Smith, Private               Cross Creek
    49. Guess, Joseph, Private                      West Alexander
    50. Hanlin, George A., Private                  Paris
    51. Hawthorn, Benjamin F., Private              Millsboro
    52. Henderson, John, Private                    Paris
    53. Hull, Robert W., Private                    Paris
    54. Johnson, George W., Private                 East Finley
    55. Lyle, Robert, Private                       Cross Creek
    56. Lyle, James C., Private                     Cross Creek
    57. McCalmont, John A., Private                 Candor
    58. McClurg, Robert, Private                    Paris
    59. McConnell, Harrison, Private                Paris
    60. McCullough, Benjamin, Private               Candor
    61. McCurdy, James K., Private                  Eldersville
    62. McElfish, Owen, Private                     West Finley
    63. Magill, James K. P., Private                Cross Creek
    64. Makeown, John, Private                      West Alexander
    65. Maloy, John, Private                        Donegal Twp.
    66. Marshall, John, Private                     Claysville
    67. Meldoon, Robert, Private                    West Alexander
    68. Metcalf, Norris, Private                    Eldersville
    69. Miller, William H., Private                 Donegal Twp.
    70. Miller, Isaac. Private                      Donegal Twp.
    71. Morris, Jesse J., Private                   Millsboro
    72. Morrow, George, Private                     Paris
    73. Mounts, Enoch, Private                      Washington
    74. Nickeson, Colin R., Private                 Claysville
    75. Nickeson, John W., Private                  Claysville
    76. Noah, James L., Private                     Eldersville
    77. Noble, Thomas L., Private                   Claysville
    78. Porter, William, Private                    West Alexander
    79. Pry, David McClurg, Private                 Cross Creek
    80. Pry, Rebert A., Private                     Cross Creek
    81. Rea, William, Private                       Cross Creek
    82. Ruffner, William A., Private                Mound City
    83. Scott, Henderson, Private                   Paris
    84. Scott, William, Private                     Eldersville
    85. Seese, Nathaniel, Private                   Candor
    86. Sprowls, George, Private                    East Finley
    87. Sprowls, Jesse M., Private                  East Finley
    88. Staley, Oliver, Private                     West Alexander
    89. Star, George, Private                       West Alexander
    90. Stollar, William, Private                   Claysville
    91. Toppin, Johnson, Private                    Millsboro
    92. Virtue, Robert, Private                     Cross Creek
    93. Wheeler, Ulysses, Private                   Eldersville
    94. Wilkins, Thomas, Private                    Cross Creek
    95. Worstell, James, Private                    Paris
    96. Wright, Marshall, Private                   Paris

Thence by cars on the Pennsylvania Central R.R., from Pittsburg,
with other Companies, this Company was taken to Camp Curtin,
Harrisburg, where it became an integral part of the 140th Regiment
of Pennsylvania Volunteers at the organization of same, September
8th, 1862, and received the designation of Co. K, its position
in line being the center of left wing. (A. F. D. I. C. H. E. K. G. B.)
Here the Company was fully equipped, and the few days of bivouac
on the beautiful Susquehanna were characterized by the making of
us full fledged soldiers in the Union army, the first taste of camp
life, and a number of refreshing baths in the river.

On the Regiment's being assigned to the guarding of the N.C.R.R., south
of York, Pa., Co. K was stationed at Monkton, Md., about six miles
south and distant from Parkton Md., "Camp Seward," the headquarters of
the Regiment. It had several miles of railroad to guard, the chief
point being a bridge about three miles below Monkton. Its quarters were
dubbed "Ambolin Barracks," consisting of a bunk building of two
stories, with a shed room attached as officers' quarters, and a cook
house. A flag pole stood in front of the barracks from which "Old
Glory" floated gracefully. The sergeants, a train of freight cars
having been wrecked a short time after our being located there,
resurrected a box car which had been thrown down an embankment, and
thus improvised independent quarters for themselves, near the main
building.

On October 13th the non-commissioned officers, as appointed by the
Captain on the organization of the Company, received their
certificates.

The period of duty here covered three months, the Company participating
in all the Regimental drills, inspections, etc., marching to and from
Parkton on the railroad tracks. The time was well put in, in drilling,
and in the usual routine of barrack duties. Nothing occurred to mar the
good name of the Company. The people of the vicinity were kind and
considerate, and they respected the members of Co. K as gentlemen. The
homes and assemblies of the people were open to them. Many things
occurred to render the service here a pleasant one. The corn husking
and big dinner at Bacon's plantation, the barn-floor husking and repast
at Quaker Matthews', with his many favors to the guard at the lower
bridge, and like recognitions, were greatly enjoyed by all who were
privileged to participate. The soldier's plain fare was abundantly
supplemented by the Diffendaffer's meals at from 10 cents and upwards,
with the luscious apple dumplings and peach cobblers with unstinted
measure of rich cream. Even now our mouths water as we think of those
baked apple dumplings and richest of cream! And as Corporal Cook has
written, "Where is the one who, when on guard at the upper bridge, does
not even yet have a sneaking feeling creep over him when he remembers
the old Frenchman's peach orchard, and the stuffed haversacks that got
over the back fence in some way and were found at the guard station?"
And no one in Co. K was the worse off if a few sacks of oysters were
taken from the car with broken truck, side-tracked for a day or two;
for that savory article of diet was just "too tempting," when the early
November snow banks afforded so good and safe cold storage. Even the
Captain enjoyed the extra diet, and suggested that "no trace be left
behind." And there was none. For a tracer, sent out when a shortage was
reported in Harrisburg, found none.

Several of us, too, remember very gratefully the little church up in
the woods, and that one east of Monkton, whereto occasionally we turned
our footsteps. Those days of soldiering had much of sunshine in them,
which lightened materially the burden of a rigorous but useful military
discipline. While here the Company was directed by special order to
serve as guard of honor in the burial of Gen. Dixon S. Miles, mortally
wounded at the surrender of Harper's Ferry, Sept. 15, 1862, whose body
was laid to rest in the church cemetery a few miles east of Monkton.
About the same time, too, our hearts were fired a little for more
stirring service by the distant booming of cannon on the battlefield of
Antietam.

Several of K were subjected to the ravages of fever prevailing here in
the Regiment and incident to exposure and some lack in sanitary
provisions. Silas Cooke, James C. Lyle, Thomas Wilkin, Wm. Porter, John
Henderson, A. B. Davis and John Marshall tasted of the experiences
of the hospital in the old stone church at Parkton. John Marshall was
the first of the Company's losses. While in Parkton for drill and
inspection he was badly hurt in going between two cars, and died Nov.
17th in the Regimental hospital from the injury and fever. Two others
of the Company died in this hospital: John Henderson, on Dec. 7th, and
Andrew B. Davis, on Dec. 9th. The name of Thomas L. Noble was dropped
from our roll, he being on Nov. 28th transferred to the quartermaster's
department by special order from Regimental headquarters. So, when the
order came to leave for the army in the field, near Fredericksburg,
Va., K's strength numbered but 92, and Silas Cooke, J. C. Lyle and Wm.
Porter, sick, must be left behind in hospital at Little York, Pa. Our
dead had been sent back for burial in their home burial places. Good
soldiers they were, though they never saw much of the "grim visage" of
war. On the morning of the 10th of December Co. K bid adieu to Monkton
and marched with everything to Parkton, Col. Roberts having received
orders to go to the front, the transportation to be ready that evening.
It was with some feeling of regret that the members of K left Monkton,
for they had become attached to the place and people, but the prospect
of entering into more active and stirring soldier life captivated and
filled everyone with enthusiasm, and the march to Parkton was made amid
continuous peals of glee and cheerfulness. And so, as late in the
evening the train passed down through Monkton, the generous cheering of
people and soldiers showed how strong had become the ties of
friendship.

Co. K shared with G a room in the Union Relief Association building in
Baltimore the night of the 10th. At night on the 11th, the Regiment was
crowded in old freight cars, open and destitute of arrangements for
fire. The weather was cold, and the whole night was consumed on the way
to the Capitol, causing no little suffering from cold, some keeping
"courage up" by little fires kept burning on floor or seats from
whittlings from pine benches.

Co. K was in her place as the 140th marched through Pennsylvania
avenue, Washington City, with flying colors, about 4 p.m., on the
13th, setting out for Burnside's army. The first night's camping out
was such a one as to be long remembered, in a wet bottom, with scarcely
a redeeming feature. In K's memorandum it is styled as "Camp Misery."
But the second night's lodging showed a commendable readiness for
improvement in the school of experience, and Co. K was not behind in
learning to accommodate itself to any conditions. So we dubbed that
night's lodging amid the pines "Camp Hope." And so those days of
marching, with sunshine and rain, with favorable and unfavorable news
from the battle being waged at Fredericksburg, with the varied
experiences on the way, were to the Company, a good schooling, for the
strenuous and vigorous service upon which we were entering. From Aquia
creek on to the front our illustrative lessons were those of war's
desolations. The soldiers of our defeated army, returning to their
former camping grounds, blackened with the smoke of battle, make an
impression on the mind and heart of each of us as we march by them into
a place designated for our camping ground. This was hailed as well
selected, a woods where pines and oaks abounded, timely for the
construction of winter quarters. This was at nightfall on the 20th of
December, the closing of a week of real soldiering, testing well the
men's powers of endurance. The reflections of the writer, as found in
his memoranda book, express well the sentiments prevailing that
Saturday night: "It seems refreshing to look out over our Company
as the boys, with tents pitched, rest and commune in a spirit of
contentment and good will. They sit beside blazing fires, pressed
closer and closer to them by the cold wintry air. Some are crawling
into their nests early--and gladly do they lay themselves down to
rest, to dream of the dear ones left at home and of future happy days.
Poor soldiers, rest in peace, with the consciousness that you are
endeavoring to do your duty as God gives you opportunity. Remember,
too, that while you are pilgrim soldiers here in this strange land,
amid danger, sin and death, the prayers and good wishes of thousands
follow you. Think of those loved ones in the pleasant home circle,
encircled by all that makes life happy--think of your cherished
institutions and sanctuary privileges; of your rich farms; of your
prosperous towns and cities--your enterprising factories; your
commerce; your country's religious freedom and civil liberty. Think
of the cost in the purchase of this boon--the sacrifice of our
forefathers--the shed blood of patriots. And think now of recreant
hands uplifted to destroy our government, striking from our history
its brightness, trampling under foot our glorious flag--symbol of
our might. Think of these things, and feel _proud_ of the position
you occupy--_soldiers for the Union_."

Co. K's men showed a good degree of skill and efficiency in
constructing the winter quarters, following with commendable accuracy
the general instructions. So that in the remaining days of December
the work was about fully done and the boys were _at home_ in their
village of booths, having in the same time become fairly well initiated
in the requirements of the service, embracing all kinds of drill, in
squad, Company, Regiment and Brigade, with inspections and reviews, an
extensive review of the Right Grand Division (Sumner's) having taken
place on the 23rd, Gen. Burnside being present. And K responded readily
to her share of details for special duty, and for police, guard and
picket duties. On the 18th day of January K shared in the delight of
the Regiment in receiving Springfield rifles to supplant our old
Austrian muskets. A glad good-bye to the old kickers!

In the months in camp near Falmouth, Co. K endured hardships,
severities, exposures and privations that tested physical endurance to
the utmost, and in them had a schooling that was to tell in the future
good record of the Regiment. But there were always a sufficiency of
spice and source of merriment and good cheer among the boys. Receipt of
news from friends, substantial tokens of love and care in boxes of good
things sent by them, camp fire chats and musings, little banquets
together, sometimes at the expense of the scanty income and to the
profit of the army sutler--all these were as "Lights among the
Shadows" in soldier life.

Co. K was favored in February with another visit from Col. Sam'l
Magill, of Cross Creek, the father of James K. P., one of our best
members, and a model in many excellent qualities of the true soldier.
Col. Magill had visited us while in Monkton. The Captain and Orderly
Sergeant were specially favored by visits from three of their
schoolmates, Rev. Messrs. McC. Blayney, Ewing and Wotring.

Another quotation from the writer's journal will show the temperament
and spirit of the boys of K, who did their part in giving the Regiment
its high standing in the army. "A soldier's Saturday night--Dec. 27.
The boys of K are now pretty comfortably housed in their booths. Take a
look in upon that of the sergeants, and we have a fair sample of the
sixteen in our Company, eight on either side of the Company street. The
sergeants with Drummer McConnell are snugly seated around a bright
fire. Boyd is leisurely smoking his pipe, sending out with each
ascending puff a loving sigh or thought of 'the girl he left behind' in
old Washington. Alexander is 'cogitating,' giving his mustache a twist
now and then, possibly thinking of some evening spent among the 'peach
blossoms.' It may be, however, only an endeavor of his to discover some
plan by which he can further contribute to our present happiness. He
has been faithful in this respect. Hayes is seated on his knapsack
coolly writing to ----. His look betokens a clear conscience, having as
usual performed his duty to the letter. His sage remarks settle many
points in dispute. In true affection his heart turns to loved sisters
and a beautiful home he left for his country's defense. He's with us
from purest love of country. Were it not for Shindle the spirits of our
mess would sometimes run low. His sly remarks would make round the most
elongated face on most occasions. The drummer boy, too, he fondly turns
to a dear wife at home and hates the recreants that drove him from her,
but he'll be with us with his rattling Yankee Doodle till the last one
of them be subdued. The 'Orderly' can only glance hastily into the
other fifteen, with a cheering 'how d' de?' The occupations are
various. The booth of the Candor squad for neatness and convenience
takes the lead. In it Will Powelson is quartered, who at his country's
call bid adieu to wife and little daughter. And there's Corporal Wm.
Pry, who left quite a family. The country may feel secure with such
soldiery between it and its foes."

The Company was noted for its cleanliness and good order, and for its
attentiveness to military discipline, under frequent and ofttimes most
exacting inspections. In the Adjutant's competitive inspections of
guard details Co. K frequently won, and on one occasion carried off all
the honors; on another, four out of the six. For excellence in work and
neatness in appearance it was often complimented.

On Feb. 28th, Silas Cooke, J. C. Lyle and Wm. Porter, left in hospital
at York, Pa., Dec. 10th, returned and were warmly welcomed back into
camp.

Corp'l Wm. L. Pry and Serg't Hayes were granted furloughs home for ten
days. While in camp near Falmouth the hearts of the Powelson brothers
were saddened by the news of the deaths of their two brothers, Samuel
and George, who were members of Co. D, 32nd Regiment of Mo. Vols., in
the army near Vicksburg.

On the 31st of December, '62, K records her fifth loss. This time a
desertion. We have only the official record: John Fulton, "deserted
Dec. 31, 1862, Georgetown, D.C." Our next loss was Harrison McConnell,
discharged Feb. 13, '63. In this case it appears that Harrison was a
minor, enlisting without the consent of his parents. They applying to
the U.S. courts, in Pittsburg, Pa., got a decision of release. On the
14th day of Feb., '63, Corp'l Isaac Donaldson died in camp of typhoid
fever. His death was one of triumph in Christian faith. But it cast a
gloom over the Company. We mourned the loss of a good soldier and a
kind companion.

The other losses up to the time of our breaking camp, April 28th, were
as follows: Corp'l John D. McCabe, discharged Feb. 13th, '63, on
surgeon's certificate of disability; Henderson Scott, discharged March
12, '63, special order War Department; Robert Lyle, discharged March
14, '63, surgeon's certificate of disability; Benjamin B. Buchanan,
discharged March 20, '63, surgeon's certificate of disability; Isaac
Golden, died April 15, '63, at Mt. Pleasant, D.C., and was buried in
the Military Asylum Cemetery, D.C., and David W. Corbin, died April
21, '63, in Stanton hospital, D.C., and buried in the same Military
Asylum Cemetery. These losses cut the roll of members down to 82.

John A. McCalmont was promoted to Corporal to date April 15th, '63, the
time of Donaldson's death. Jos. Smith Graham was made Corporal, to date
the time of McCabe's discharge, Feb. 13, '63.

When the Company marched out from camp on April 28th, Lieut. Sweeney
was in Washington, Pa., on leave of absence, and Musician McConnell was
at home on furlough. Robert McClurg was with the Pioneer Corps. J. H.
Fordyce, Ezra Conaway, Michael Daugherty and Ben. McCullough were on
detached duty as teamsters. Colin R. Nickeson, Owen McElfish and John
Makeown were sick and left at Falmouth. The sick in hospitals in
Washington and other places were: D. J. Butterfoss, Ben. Cummins, John
Day, Geo. Hanlin, Geo. Morrow, Enoch Mounts and Wm. A. Ruffner. In all
absent from the ranks 17, leaving 65 to cross the Rappahannock and
enter the battle of Chancellorsville, as follows: Capt. Stockton,
Lieut. Cook, Sergeants Powelson, Boyd, Alexander, Hayes and Shindle;
Corporals Cooke, Powelson, Ralston, Pry, Gardner, Hanlin, McCalmont and
Graham; Musician Morris, privates Allison, Abram Andrews, Peter
Andrews, Arthurs, Berryhill, Briggs, George Carter, Jesse Carter,
Thomas Carter, Chester, Chisholm, Jos. Corbin, Cochran, Dickson,
Dungan, Earnest, Frazier, Geary, Guess, Hawthorn, Hull, Johnson, J. C.
Lyle, McCurdy, Magill, Maloy, Meldoon, Metcalf, Wm. Miller, Isaac
Miller, J. W. Nickeson, Noah, Porter, Robt. Pry, David Pry, Rea, Wm.
Scott, Seese, Geo. Sprowls, Jesse Sprowls, Staley, Star, Stollar,
Toppin, Virtue, Wheeler, Wilkin, Worstell and Wright.

Co. K participated with the Regiment in all the five days of action,
being more or less under fire the entire time. Our first experience in
line of battle was on a by-road leading out from Plank Road, about a
mile east of Chancellorsville. Thick woods in our rear. Dense pine
thickets in front. Fences were leveled. Shells crushing in tops of
trees behind us. Balls occasionally zipping nearby, and enemy coming
nearer, but could not be seen. In those moments of trial, what a study
in human nature! The rebels came on in heavy columns. Our skirmishers
are driven in. Orders given to fall back, and our going back through
that brush was a terror. No order could be maintained. But once out of
timber and on road, we were soon right again, and ever after were ready
for the Johnnies. We had been initiated, practically blindfolded. In
that first day of May and several days following Co. K was tested in
nearly all phases of engagement, its chief work being constructing
entrenchments and _abatis_; and in the hottest conflict on the third
day, in support of Knapp's battery. In this particular service K had
some protection in an embankment of a cross road, while shot and shell
passed over in dreadful profusion. Capt. Stockton had shelter only by
a little sapling, which was cut off a few feet above him, Lieut. Col.
Frazier remarking, "rather a close call, Captain."

To a soldier in his first battle there are strange feelings and
peculiar experiences. That the members of K shared in these may be
indicated by a quotation from Corp'l Cooke's writings to me: "On the
1st day of May, '63, I saw the first wounded man as we marched out to
support the skirmish line to the right of plank road east of
Chancellorsville. The sight of the blood running down the man's face
made me blind; but it soon passed away, and I never experienced the
sensation again during the war, though I saw many worse sights. It was
then the Company had several new experiences--lying in front of a
battery to support it (in the open ground, just east of C.) lying in
the woods at night while an occasional long-tailed, comet-like shell
would shriek over us, while we buried our noses in the dirt and leaves;
the wild experience of supporting the battery behind it, while it
seemed all the artillery of the enemy was playing upon it. That Sunday
artillery duel was the most terrific experience to me of the whole war.
Yet, strange to say, there were but few casualties in K worthy of
mention. That being our first battle many things were vividly impressed
on my mind: the digging of trenches; the attack on Howard (by Jackson)
that _thundering_ Saturday night; the filing by of the 11th Corps the
next morning; the disabled cannon swung under axles; the women pale
and frightened, fleeing from the burning Chancellorsville houses,
creeping along our trenches to find a place of safety; the band
shelled while playing the "Star Spangled Banner"; the dragging off by
hand (by detail from the 140th) the remnant of our battery in front;
the falling back to a new line, and finally the retreat."

Much of our maneuvering was done in woods and tangling brush, very
annoying. K withstood its baptism in battle well, and met the
discomfiture, defeat and retreat of our army in very good spirits,
sharing in the "ups and downs" in the march in rain and mud. Many
expressed regret as we recrossed the river, for better things had been
expected.

On the north side Lieut. Sweeney and Geo. McConnell were met,
returning from their visits home. This was on the morning of May 6th.
The march thence back to our old camps was made much "as you please,"
characteristically like American soldiering; but we got there
O.K.--for supper, and that after considerable rustling. One thing was
manifest, K had parted with many of its possessions in extra clothing,
comforts, etc., and some essentials were lost. The fact is, when we
were up in support battery on the 3rd, our knapsacks left by order, at
trenches, were ransacked by camp followers. [See the Transcriber's
Note at the end of the text] fact is, when we were up in support of
battery on the 3rd, our knap- Wheeler, in arm; McCalmont, in foot;
Briggs, in back; Chester, in leg; and J. W. Nickeson, thumb shot off.
Corp'l W. L. Pry, in falling back to hospital, overcome with fatigue,
accidentally shot himself in hand.

Comrade McClurg (who was with the Pioneer Corps, which, while laying
pontoons, was shelled by the rebs and had to seek shelter till our
cavalry drove the rebs away) reports that he cut slips from apple trees
behind which he took refuge and sent them by letter to the man on his
home place, and that today he eats apples from a large tree grown from
the slips grafted on the two branches of a young tree then recently
planted. (On a visit, in June, '04, the writer saw with much
satisfaction this tree.)

On the 11th day of May, for sanitary effect, our camp was moved about a
mile, and K soon had herself in summer array. On the 13th K was
assigned to a new place in line and camp, other Companies, too, being
changed. (C, B, K, I, A, H, G, D, F, E.) This changed K from left to
right centre. On the 14th, the Orderly with a volunteer squad
beautified the Company street, planting out little pines, etc.

On the 20th day of May, '63, Wm. A. Ruffner was discharged on surgeon's
certificate of disability. And on the 21st K suffered the loss of
Corporal W. L. Pry. The accidental wound had been followed by the
amputation of the hand, and from some cause or other, it was deemed
necessary to make another amputation. This time the whole arm. But the
shock and loss of blood were too much. At 2:30 p.m. he died.
Arrangements were made to embalm the body and ship it to Cross Creek,
Pa., for interment. Serg't B. F. Powelson was given a three days' pass
to accompany the remains as far as Washington, D.C. D. McC. Pry was
promoted Corporal to fill the vacancy caused by the death of his uncle.

George Morrow, in the hospital at Washington, D.C., was reported as
discharged on May 23rd, '63, on surgeon's certificate of disability.
But a few days afterward there came the sad news of his death in the
hospital. Thus seven of our number had already succumbed to death
through sickness, and one from a wound.

To relieve the severities of soldier life friends at home had sent many
extras in food and delicacies to the members of the Company and
Regiment in camp.

The recollections of the closing days of May and the early days of
June, too, to us are very vivid: the rigid drilling, the rumors of
movements, and of Lee's army heading northward, the breaking up of camp
streets with accumulated beans, rice, etc., that the same might not
fall in the enemy's hands. And now we number ourselves for campaign and
conflict.

On our roll are now but 79 names. Exclusive of those on detached or
special duty and the sick, only about 55 or 56 were ready for the line.

When on June 14th the army started north, Co. K bore up bravely in
marching through dust and heat, and now and then wading streams. How
vivid our recollections of that awful dust--when in evening coming down
to the valley of the Occoquan and before wading it, it rested on our
knapsacks (according to Serg't Shindle's measurement) a quarter of an
inch deep! Blistered feet! The waters of the Occoquan soothed them. Nor
do we forget that big spring near Fairfax Station, like the water from
the rock smitten by Moses, a source of delight to thousands for several
days. The boys, too, of K shared in the sights and soldier enjoyments
at Centerville. Here on the 19th or 20th of June our Company positions
were again changed in the Regiment. Now from C on the right stand C, F,
G, D, K, I, B, H, E, A. K now is the color Company, the third position
of honor, and this it held ever afterward.

While on duty a few days at Gainsville the boys of K improved their
opportunities in securing some change in diet, and the First Sergeant
tried his hand in trading coffee and sugar for some extras for the
larder; and were Lieut. Cook and Smith Graham living they could testify
to his success. The Sergeant's repeated efforts as well as successes in
this, they say, were due to that fine looking "gal," Evelyn Harrison
Marsteller, at the Marsteller Mansion.

From this on in all our movements we were kept in constant readiness
for action, as the army was held between Washington City and the enemy,
ever alert, picketing and skirmishing, marching regardless of rain or
swollen streams, through sections devastated by the armies, over
battlefields with their terrible sights. And boys of K, can you forget
the night at Gum Tree Springs, when after that hard day's marching and
watching, you bivouacked, and how it rained all night? Nevertheless it
was a good sound sleep from ten or eleven till four in the morning, on
a bed of two flat rails, (the "Orderly" was lucky to get such) one end
on a stone or broken piece of rail and the other on a bank, the water
streaming beneath, each one for himself, wrapped with his scant remnant
of hard-tack and coffee, gun and ammunition, in a gum blanket or piece
of tent, and the cap drawn down over the face. Never were sleep and
rest sweeter! And the early hours found us pressing on towards the
Potomac, over swollen streams. How timely those good rail fences on the
heights, overlooking the river at Edward's Ferry. And how readily every
one in K obeyed the order to _take only the top rail_, until the
Company had its share of blazing fires to dry and warm us! Then that
never-to-be-forgotten night when we crossed on the pontoon bridges.
K's turn came after hours of waiting, and at 2 o'clock in the morning
we found ourselves in "My Maryland." All were practically asleep on
march or halt. Oh, those plagued stops or halts through all that weary
night! Yes, you remember your Orderly Sergeant's mishap--how, in one
of those miserable stops, he fell asleep, having dropped down by a
bush on the roadside, a half mile or so from the river--no sooner down
than asleep, and did not wake up by the usual call of comrades; and so
two hours passed in that innocent sleep, and he got completely lost
from the Regiment, and remained so (as everything was moving onward)
till evening of second day, June 28th. Fortunately he found James
Arthurs, of K, who drove the Regimental wagon. Not knowing anything
better, he stayed by the stuff till Arthurs received orders to take
much needed rations to the Regiment, which was found in bivouac, just
south of Frederick City across the Monocacy. And the lost was found,
and the "Orderly" was welcomed with profound rejoicings, no one
knowing what had become of him, the last any one could remember aught
of him was while crossing on the pontoons. And does any one with K on
June 29th forget that march of 35 miles by the 2nd Corps to hill just
northeast of Uniontown, Md.? We trow not. How we enjoyed the rest and
the foraging (from fresh pastures) on the 30th, and Gen. Hancock's
order of congratulation and thanks. Here Cummins and others from the
hospitals joined us. And vivid, too, is each one's remembrance of the
march of 30 miles we made on afternoon and night of July 1st, our
Brigade being rear guard.

Of the 79 now on K's roll as we take our position on the battle line on
the morning of July 2nd, 22 are absent--in hospital or absent
sick--Silas Cooke, George Ralston, Peter Andrews, D. J. Butterfoss, J.
W. Day, Jos. C. Frazier, George Hanlin, J. W. Nickeson, Wm. Stollar and
Marshall Wright. On detached or detailed duty--John F. Gardner, James
Arthurs, M. Daugherty, J. H. Fordyce, Ben McCullough, J. L. Noah, Ezra
Conaway, Enoch Mounts, J. K. McCurdy, Robert McClurg, Nat. Seese and
Jas. Worstell.

Each one participating in the fighting at Gettysburg is able to tell
his story of that wonderful conflict. It was fought for the most part
on open ground and much could be seen. But the average soldier's vision
was confined largely to his immediate surroundings. Yet individual
testimony goes far ofttimes to settle matters over which there arise
differences in opinion. Co. K stayed well together until the hasty
retreat, and its path seems clearly defined. So distinct were the
impressions thereof on the memory of the writer that, on a visit to the
battlefield in 1898, the only time I ever visited it, 35 years after
the conflict, I could start in where we marched in and follow our route
from start to finish. Could stand where we stood in line as we emerged
from the strip of timber, and where Col. Roberts fell and our right
wing suffered so heavily, and could see afresh our changed position to
meet existing conditions. Since called to this work, I have resurrected
from the old trunk the almost daily writings I kept during my term of
service--the most of which I was able to save amid the vicissitudes of
marches and battles. They strengthen and verify my recollections. And I
will here submit an extract from my "Journal Notes," taken at the time,
which gives my impressions of, and a glance at my experiences in that
terrible vortex of battle in which we were on the evening of July 2,
1863.

"Gen. Hancock now sends his 1st Division to the relief of Sickles. It
moves in with rapidity in fine order. The battle rages terribly. We
pass the Trostle house where the Massachusetts battery has nearly been
swept away--up on the Emmitsburg road west. But soon we are marched
back by and south of Trostle's, form line of battle and pass on south,
through corner of wheat field, on edge of which Gen. Zook is mortally
wounded--on through strip of timber, over or around huge boulders. It
is almost six o'clock when we are in line of battle, facing south and
west--Col. Roberts killed in front of Regiment--right wing in open
field under severe enfilading fire, suffer terrible losses--Lt. Col.
Frazier, as soon as he realizes situation changes front of right wing
to face Peach Orchard--our Company on left. We fire continuously.
Serg't Boyd and I pass to left of Company as all are doing well their
duty. We fire from big rock into bit of timber dark with smoke. I fire
some 17 rounds. Boyd calls out, 'Orderly, they are falling back.' I
fire a load I had just put in. Boyd has disappeared. I start back
seemingly alone, going out about the way I came in--soon come up with
others, but I do not know them--all running for dear life and Johnnie
bullets rattling all about us. Crossing an open space, I could see the
rebels close upon us to my left--they order me to surrender--but I
can't see it--I'll run the risk, as I could see our lines to the right
and some timber in front into which I soon pass, and get out of range.
Could hear the rattling of the muskets of our lines. It was a bloody
battle, but Co. K and the whole of the 140th acted nobly."

Back a little distance I found a few of our boys, and we found our way
back to our field hospital. Through much of that night I assisted at
the hospital. I held the arm of Lieut. Vance of Co. C while his hand
was amputated. That to me was a most dreadful night. I slept soundly a
few hours in the morning. Then joined the remnant of our noble Regiment
on the line they held that eventful 3rd of July.

When the smoke of battle in that fearful conflict in evening of 2nd of
July, and that world renowned battle of the 3rd, most of which we saw
distinctly, had passed away, K numbered her dead five: Serg't T. C.
Hayes, Thomas J. Carter, Robert W. Hull, Wm. H. Miller and Jesse
Sprowls. All good and true soldiers. I deeply felt the loss of "Clif."
Hayes, my blanket mate, warm-hearted, noble-spirited, ever faithful.
These were buried on the 4th, as best we could. I superintended the
burial of Hayes and Carter. Hayes' remains were soon removed to the
home graveyard in Cross Creek Village, Pa. Comrade Magill tells me that
the remains of Carter were interred in the National Cemetery,
Gettysburg, but that it is erroneously marked Carpenter.

Lieut. Cook and Serg't Shindle were taken prisoners. And our list of
wounded were: Serg't Alexander, in arm and hand; Wm. Hanlin, in hand
and leg; Robert Virtue, severely in breast; Robert Meldoon, in face and
leg; Johnson Toppin, in shoulder; Ben Earnest, severely in face; Isaac
Chisholm, in thigh; Jos. Corbin, in leg; Colin Nickeson, in breast.

Corp'l Wm. R. H. Powelson was promoted to be sergeant in place of
Hayes, and James K. P. Magill to be corporal in his place.

One instance should here be related in K's favor. J. B. Allison, a
private of this Company, was the instrument of saving the colors of our
Regiment. I give it as he told it to me in a recent letter: "As we were
falling back from our position near and in sight of the Peach Orchard,
at Gettysburg, our color-bearer was severely wounded in the back. He
fell forward, and raising himself partly up called to me to _save the
flag_. I lifted him partly up and drew the flag staff from under him.
I kept the flag in my possession for say a half hour, until I came up
with the scattered group of the Regiment. I gave the flag into the
hands of a corporal of Co. E (I don't remember his name). I believe he
was finally made a captain." This, I am told, was Corporal Power.

The "fiery ordeal" of Gettysburg as a test found some wanting in true
courage. And one faint heart in K was sifted out. George Star was
missing when with our Corps we took up our march southward after Lee.
And we had to report him _a deserter_, under date of July 15, '63.
Comrade Mounts reports that Star was seen three years after and
reported himself as having traded suits with a farm lad a short
distance out from Gettysburg, and gone west.

K's readiness in coping with obstacles and meeting present emergencies
was manifest when on July 17th the race to head off Lee's army being
ended, we quietly turned in east of "Maryland Heights," below Harper's
Ferry, to rid ourselves of a month's accumulated dirt together with the
usual accompaniment, and the wholesale and retail slaughter of the
_pediculos vestimenti_ was immense. Then, when on next day we came
upon nature's own sanitary provision in fields of dewberries and what
some foraging on the farms of Loudoun valley brought us, we toned up
our impoverished and abused bodily systems, and further fitted
ourselves for the active work in the months to come, in which we pushed
the rebels back through Culpepper to the Rapidan, and then, when they
were reinforced, ran with them a race for Washington, with the brisk
encounter at Auburn, or "Coffee Hill" and battle of Bristoe Station,
heading them off effectually at Centerville, and in turn pushing them
back across the Rappahannock, with encounter here and there, and last
the early winter dash and conflict at Mine Run, where the Johnnies were
strongly entrenched, and finally settling down in good winter quarters
at Stevensburg and near Brandy Station.

K shared in enough of the spices of soldier life to keep the boys in
good humor and give them a zest for the hardships endured. Will
Powelson and others of the Candor mess got off easily, when mustered
up to headquarters by the provo-guard, having in their possession a
good-sized pig, by a caution from Gen. Miles not to ever be _caught_
again. They got even with the General by sending him a neat roast from
a hind quarter. And Silas Cooke tells of the wading of the Rapidan in
the latter part of November when it cut like a knife, and charging up
the heights into the rebel breast-works, and drying ourselves in the
sun; then of the race after the long-tailed lamb, and the row of fat
porkers all dressed that morning by the rebels, left in their haste,
and divided among us. Some of our boys will remember the "hot coffee
made from the contents of a whiskey canteen, which blistered our
mouths while we swallowed it to the music of the long roll, and did
not know what was the matter until the owner of the canteen (who had
come in late and hung canteen on top of others, and, in Will
Powelson's haste to make the coffee, was first to be taken) let it
out." But let it pass now--42 or more years have passed--what matters
it now whose canteen it was? He may be living and be serving the God
of his fathers faithfully as an elder in some staid Presbyterian
church. The circumstances were then trying, and possibly some one
needed a warming up. Comrade McCalmont assures us that the coffee was
_warming_ and made the marching enlivening to some of them, as we
forced our way along on, as Cooke adds, "the march along the railroad,
the camp in the cut, the fearfully cold night, and the troops the next
morning stripped for the charge (at Mine Run) on the frosty hillside,
but called off on account of the cold, the long, gloomy night of
retreat amidst fires on either side to keep us warm (and light our
way). Retreat No. 2 for the 140th, and the last I believe." So in all
this campaign K sustained a worthy record.

Some changes had taken place. Enoch Mounts was discharged Aug. 22, '63,
on surgeon's certificate of disability; Robert Virtue, one of Cross
Creek's best young men, died from effects of wounds received at
Gettysburg, in the hospital at Baltimore, Sept. 9, '63. Joseph C.
Frazier was discharged on surgeon's certificate of disability, Sept.
30, '63, having been in hospital a long time. John W. Nickeson was on
account of impaired health transferred to the Veteran Reserve Corps,
Nov. 15, '63. John M. Day was discharged Dec. 12, '63, at Convalescent
Camp, Philadelphia, on surgeon's certificate of disability. Ben F.
Earnest, who had been severely wounded in face at Gettysburg, but had
been back on duty for some time, died rather suddenly in camp near
Brandy Station, on Dec. 14, '63. Here K lost one of its most devoted
members. Corporal J. F. Gardner and James L. Noah were on Dec. 17, '63,
transferred by special order No. 328, Headquarters Army of Potomac, to
the Corps Artillery Brigade. These losses brought K's list down to 65.
Wm. Porter was promoted corporal in the vacancy caused by the transfer
of Gardner. Capt. Stockton had been detailed to service in the General
Recruiting Station at Pittsburg, Pa., leaving the Company on July 29th.
And Lieut. Sweeney was appointed, on Dec. 29, '63, to duty at 2nd Corps
headquarters; later he was assigned to duty at Gen. Barlow's
headquarters, and in latter part of '64 he was appointed on the staff
of Gen. Miles. Thus the Company was without a commissioned officer, and
it remained so until about the latter part of June, '64.

In the latter part of December, '63, Serg't B. F. Powelson was given a
furlough of ten days as a recognition of his services in looking after
the Company's interests. And in the latter part of January he was
assigned to recruiting service at Washington, Pa. And at close of this
special duty he was granted leave to attend a military school at
Philadelphia and to go before Gen. Casey's examining board at
Washington, D.C.

During the winter K shared in picket and other duties and in the early
spring reconnoissance to the Rapidan, "when we lay," says Silas Cooke,
"and slept with the rain pouring down upon us from above and the water
running under us--bones all aching--then back to camp."

During this time and up to the opening (May 1st) of campaign, K lost
four more, as follows: James K. McCurdy was discharged Feb. 17, '64 by
special order 78, War Department; Serg't Sam'l K. Shindle died March
17, '64, in Andersonville (Ga.) prison, buried in grave No. 1114. He
taken prisoner at Gettysburg, was kept for a while on Belle Island,
then in Charlotte, N.C., and finally was herded in that awful prison
pen. Thus went out the life of one possessing many commendable traits
as a soldier. Michael Daugherty died March 18, '64, Brandy Station,
Va., from injury inflicted by the kick of a mule. He was buried in the
National Cemetery, Culpepper, Va., Block 1, Sec. A, Row 4, Grave 17. He
served well as a teamster in the Q.M. department. Isaac Chisholm was,
on March 20, '64, transferred to Co. G, 9th Regiment, Veteran Reserve
Corps.

  [Illustration: SILAS COOKE

   (From a recent Photograph)]

The names of the following recruits had been added to the roll: William
A. Jackson, Florence, Pa., mustered in as a private, Feb. 29, '64; John
W. Tucker, Florence, Pa., mustered in as a private, March 1, '64; James
A. Cummins, Cross Creek, Pa., mustered in as a private, March 29, '64.
These additions made the number on our roll, May 1, 1864, sixty-four.
Excluding those on detached duty and the absent sick and Lieut. Cook, a
prisoner, and we had but 47 for all duty on the battlefield.

J. Smith Graham was promoted sergeant in vacancy caused by the death
of Shindle, and James C. Lyle took Graham's place as corporal. John
A. McCalmont served as corporal in the Color Guard. Lieut. Ray was by
detail in command of K from May 1st through May 8th. Captains Linton
and Kerr and a Lieutenant of Co. E also had command of K at different
times during the absence of her own commissioned officers. Corporal
Cooke says that Capt. Kerr had the command at Spottsylvania C.H.

As the writer was not with the Company when the Army of the Potomac
began its famous _on to Richmond_ under Grant in May, and until the
latter part of June, when the 140th was before Petersburg, he depends
mostly upon what the comrades who were present can furnish for K. And
he congratulates his comrades in having Corporal Cooke to aid in the
matter. He speaks for K up to May 12th, when a wound laid him aside
and he was no more with us. He tells us that in passing over the
Chancellorsville battleground he gathered some flowers, which he sent
home, and they are preserved unto this day. He tells us of the charge
the 140th made in the Wilderness, when the rebels were massing to
break the Union lines in a weak place. Col. Frazier, thinking we had
better be doing something as the balls were falling thick about us as
we lay in line of battle, received permission of Gen. Miles to go in
on a charge. The Colonel gave his orders, and, it goes for the saying,
they were executed. We went in on the double-quick (the double-quick
of the 140th was always a run), yelling like mad, halted as we reached
position beyond and over a small remnant of the Irish Brigade, then
fired front, then right, then left, then front until no enemy returned
our fire. Prisoners taken reported that we broke by these volleys
three lines of battle, and, night coming on, they gave up their
charge, thinking a large force was in their front. Gen. Hancock gave
us great praise for it. So quickly was it done that but few casualties
occurred. Cooke was hit on right thigh by a spent bullet, cutting
clothing and breaking a pocket knife, badly bruising but not disabling
him.

K took part in another charge on May 8th at Todd's Tavern, but suffered
terribly there. Comrade Isaac Miller says that it was known as the
"Cracker Fight," because Commissary Noble was in the act of issuing
rations of crackers when the onset came. Cooke says that the 140th
(except K and another Company) were on picket, under Capt. McCullough.
K and the other Company were lying in the edge of a woods, along which
a road ran, turning into the woods just where they lay; and the rebels
came up on the opposite side of the valley and opened fire. Gen. Miles,
riding along, was compelled to seek shelter. Abram Andrews of K was
struck and bruised some. As Gen. Miles passed on, Col. Brady thought he
would do something, and ordered part of his Regiment, lying to the
right, to charge out over an open field in our front and down into the
valley in open view of the rebels. Then he ordered our two companies to
charge out on the left of his men, and to cheer as we went in. And
there in one volley many of K fell. Cooke was first in file. The one in
his rear and six to his left were killed or wounded. The killed were
John Maloy and John W. Tucker. Many of the wounded were left on the
field, as the Union lines were pushed back. I cannot refrain from
relating what Isaac Miller told me in a letter written Aug. 19, '04. A
sad story, indeed! He was severely wounded in leg and thigh. Was at the
foot of the Company. John Maloy was at the head; and both fell and lay
the Company's length apart. Maloy was wounded about in same place as
Miller. They could not move, but could talk to each other. Miller lay
there for five days, then the rebels carried him back to a barn and
later to their field hospital. He plead for Maloy. But they said he was
too far gone. On the eighth day he died, so they told Miller; and then,
at Miller's appeal, they promised to bury him. Who could keep the tears
back when told of how one of our brave comrades thus gave up his life
in the service of his country? It is some relief to hear it whispered
that in those long days of suffering some ladies of the farm did what
they could to care for him and others like him. Let us hope it was so,
and that the angels of God's love comforted him.

Cooke says that Tucker fell before him at the rail fence where we
stopped to fire, pierced in the temple by a ball, and there George
Sprowls had his hair combed by a ball that took the cap from his head.
Cooke adds, "Then came the order to fall back to main line. It was a
beautiful but sorrowful Sabbath day. Then came the Po river excursion,
where the whole line in the darkness fired at a dog--the artillery
duel, where a number of our boys perished as we lay behind our battery.
Then the all night march through the rain and mud to Spottsylvania--the
massing of troops, and, at early dawn, the famous charge of the 2nd
Corps, through the open fields upon the rebel breast-works, over them
and along them to the right, capturing two batteries, three Generals,
with Johnson's whole Division as prisoners; on down works to right,
then out towards enemy's second line. Murky, foggy, no rebels to be
seen, but balls flying thick as evidence of their presence; when thud!
a ball took me in the right side and arm, whirling me round and down. I
was just crawling toward the protection of a small earthwork in the
rear of the main works when I looked up and saw George Ralston coming
along. He helped me back as far as the provo-guard, passing on our way
Jim Cummins, wounded through both thighs. It was the last seen of the
brave recruit of 16 years. Ralston left me sitting with my back against
a tree. Then a drummer boy helped me back to an empty army wagon used
as an ambulance. As chance would have it, Will Powelson, also wounded,
got into same wagon and rode to the Corps hospital. We kept together
until we got to hospital at Pittsburg, Pa., and remained together till
he went back to the Regiment. A splendid friend. That ride in an army
wagon with an ounce ball grinding around near my back bone was the most
excruciating experience I ever had. I have the ball yet. Can say I
caught one ball and stopped another in those two innings. How many I
struck out I do not know."

On receiving an intimation of a little _coup de maitre_ on the part of
Corp'l Cooke that eventful morning, I wrote him, insisting on knowing
about it. I will here relate only the bare facts. Cooke was alone when
he mounted a portion of the breast-works, where there were transverse
sections about every 24 feet and running back about 20 feet. One of
our officers had been shot down who attempted going over just before
he did. As Cooke reached the top he saw about 20 Johnnies back against
the muddy excavations, waving their hats and cheering vociferously. He
looked as fierce as he could and yelled, "Get back here!" pointing to
our rear, and those Johnnies as one man obeyed, going over the works
as directed like as many monkeys; and, as he turned to look, they were
going pell mell for our rear, never looking back. He says he could
never devise a satisfactory explanation of their actions. But he knows
of the fact, and feels confident that he helped to swell the number of
prisoners that morning.

K's loss in killed and wounded that day amounted to more than one-third
of those engaged. There were four killed: The Cummins brothers,
Benjamin and James; Joseph Guess and John Makeown--all most excellent
soldiers, as were the two killed on the 8th of May. This reduced the
number on our roll to 58. Among the severely wounded was George
Sprowls, who fell into the hands of the enemy. Thus our losses from the
ranks on May 8th to 12th were: 6 killed, 16 wounded, and of the wounded
two were prisoners--Isaac Miller and George Sprowls.

During that fearful day of struggle in the "Bloody Angle," a detail was
called for from Brigade headquarters, out of the 140th--two from K--to
bring off the cannon the rebels had left in their flight when Hancock
charged the Salient, but which were now between the lines. Abram
Andrews and Norris Metcalf volunteered from K, and they did their share
of shouting when the feat was accomplished.

During the next 31 days, which brought the 2nd Corps through a number
of hard marches, hotly contested skirmishes and battles to the south
side of the James river, K bore an honorable part. At the time the army
was withdrawn to the north side of the North Anna river, in view of a
change of base, K came near having a part of its number gobbled up by
the rebels. As the army was retiring, K then in command of Lieut. Kerr,
was among the troops that covered the movement, and were deployed on
northern bank as pickets or skirmishers. The south side bank was 25 or
30 feet higher than the north one, and was lined with old rifle pits.
The rebels followed and occupied these, from which they kept up a
lively fire for some time. George Hanlin says that the river was
narrow, 60 or 70 feet wide, and K's line had no protection but a few
trees, which they hugged tighter than they did their sweethearts as
they bid them adieu when first off for war, and could only take a shot
now and then. Those good old trees! We see them yet, and we'll never
forget them while memory holds her throne. Late in the day the enemy
ceased firing. On a reconnoitering, the true condition was found out.
Earlier in the day (as ascertained later) the order had been given
calling off the pickets. This was to be done stealthily. From
individual to individual the word was to be quietly passed--"fall back
to rear." All went well till it came to George Johnson, who was hard of
hearing and did not catch the command, nor was he in a position to
notice the withdrawing. So he and all those in the Company that were to
his right were left. Having no orders to retire, they staid at their
posts. So, near sunset, being assured by two negroes, who had crossed
the river, that the Johnnies "had sure done gone," they got together,
Ralston taking command. All were at sea, not knowing where the Regiment
had gone. But they went directly back from the river. A few miles on
they saw in camp some cavalry. Ralston approached them to ascertain
whether friends or foes. Happily he found friends, and gave the "all
right" signal to the boys. It was Gen. Gregg's Cavalry, and he directed
the boys to remain with his command till their Regiment could be
located. This was done the third day after, when the Brigade was in
vicinity of Rural Plains, and they were in time for a hand in the fight
at Tolopotomy Creek. Then they were, in a few days, in the battles
fought at Cold Harbor. In one of these Andrew Chester was severely
wounded in left leg, and was disabled from further active service.

The 15th of June found K with the Regiment, after a forced march,
fighting for the possession of Petersburg. But that was too important a
place for the rebels, a key to Richmond, and, having the inside way,
they were there in force to resist.

In the campaign from the Wilderness to the James, K had 6 killed and 17
wounded, or more than half the number actually in line of battle. But
the Company was good for service yet, and formed an integral part of
the hosts that fastened themselves about Petersburg. About this time
Capt. Stockton returned, and the orderly sergeant came back on the 30th
day of June, having passed an examination as First Class Lieutenant.

At 3 o'clock, morning of July 25th, we are on the march, crossing the
Appomattox on pontoons, two miles above City Point, and, guided by
fires, we push on and cross the James at Curles Neck on muffled
pontoons. Find ourselves in support of the 26th Michigan and 2nd Heavy
Artillery in a charge on the enemy's works, which are captured with a
battery of four heavy guns. James H. Fordyce was wounded, having a
thumb shot off. Well we remember our sylvan camp retreat that
night--the sound sleep, for oh, how tired we were. In line by 3 o'clock
in the morning--later move to right and entrenching for security, a
general line being formed. In the afternoon of the 27th it was noticed
that the rebels were striking tents and moving to their right. Gen.
Miles called upon Capt. Stockton to send some men out to scout for an
hour to ascertain the purport or extent of this movement. Serg't B. F.
Powelson with three other men responded, who went some distance to the
right, making the discovery that the rebels were aiming to turn our
flank. From a tree the sergeant could see a distance into the enemy's
country, but no very large amount of troops. The attack made by the
rebels in about an hour was successfully checked, and, at 2 o'clock
next morning our part of the Brigade, serving as rear guard, quietly
stole away and followed our troops, who had recrossed the river during
the night, returning by night to our old quarters back of Petersburg.
The object of this movement by our Corps was a ruse to draw and hold
the enemy's forces north of river, while, in the blowing up of a fort,
entrance to Petersburg might be made.

The heat becoming intense in camp, we indulged ourselves in building
arbors for protection, each Company by turns using the Regimental
baggage wagon. On this occasion Co. K was officially complimented as
having the best shade and cleanest quarters.

Then came heavy fatigue work in trenches and parallels. Six hours on
and six hours off, day and night. K's sober boys will remember the deep
study as to what use to make of some hot whiskey issued for stimulants.
Some tried stewing their hard tack in it. It did not prove of much
value.

In some of the fighting about Petersburg George Johnson was wounded,
but not seriously. Ofttimes the cannonading was terrific, and we were
maneuvering much and there was constant activity.

When the Second Corps, on Aug. 12, '64, dropped out of their places
about Petersburg, K withstood well that fearful jaunt to City Point,
though the writer must confess that, owing to the extreme heat and dust
it was "nip and tuck" with many of us. While awaiting transports here,
on the morning of the 13th, the writer and Sergeant Graham visited the
1st Division hospital to see Miss Mary Vance, a lady from Cross Creek,
Pa., whom Co. K claimed, and who all through the war gave her means,
time and strength in unceasing, disinterested ministrations to the sick
and wounded soldiers. We were also favored with meeting Miss Hancock,
of New York, well known as a lady of unceasing patriotic zeal.

Co. K shared in surprise, when, on the morning of the 14th, we
disembarked and found ourselves in the locality we occupied on the 26th
of July, in Deep Bottom. And now for the first time for many of us we
have opportunity of seeing that plain, quiet leader, Gen. Grant,
Hancock's headquarters being near where K was left with the colors,
while the Regiment was on the skirmish line. For a good part of the
time in this second Deep Bottom expedition, Capt. Stockton had command
of the Regiment. Co. K and part of Co. D were out on picket the second
night, out on the Division's advanced position to the right, and to
those who still survive there come vivid recollections of how we made
the most and best of our situation, there being a home in the vicinity,
with its fruit trees, a corn field and a sweet potato patch. Only
things were appropriated as seemed necessary. Magill can tell you what
a good supper he and the "Orderly" had together. Lieut. Burns, in
charge, and myself are known to have had a dry place on which to sleep
a while--a stable door, only borrowed. It was on the next day we shared
in that two miles charge, the Confederate Gen. Chambliss' corpse being
passed over by K in its advance, and we reached a point about six miles
from Richmond. The rebels became alarmed and are heavily reinforced.
This was the object of this movement--to divert attention and hold the
rebel troops, while the 5th Corps secures a foothold on the Weldon
railroad south of Petersburg. Protecting ourselves from being flanked,
and the purpose of our maneuvers having been accomplished, on the night
of the 20th the James was recrossed. During 18th, Capt. Stockton being
in hospital sick, Capt. Pipes assumed command of the Regiment, and on
the 20th Capt. Henry took command. We, of K, well remember that
never-to-be-forgotten tramp, tramp all the night of the 20th, through
darkness, rain and mud; awful and yet laughable, when men get lost,
when hats, shoes, caps, etc., disappeared, as the boys stumbled on in
brush and darkness. But we reach our old camping ground at Petersburg,
only to find things torn up. But what matters! for Uncle Sam has other
work for the valiant 2nd Corps, and off we set for the flank movement
on the Weldon railroad, the seizing of this road being the main purpose
in the movements. Co. K well remembers, too, the part it took in the
tearing up of the railroad and its corn roasts over the fires of
burning ties; and in the Ream Station engagement on Aug. 25th, in the
opening of which the 140th had special work assigned it in the rear and
on right, and our experience that night in falling back to a point
south of Petersburg near the Weldon railroad, where substantial works
were constructed.

At this point, Sept. 27, '64, K lost the First Sergeant, B. F.
Powelson, who was discharged to accept a First Lieutenancy in Co. G,
41st U.S.C.T. It was a struggle to break away from comrades who had
become so dear through so many days of true soldier life. And I well
remember that I almost gave up to my feelings. Corporal George Ralston
was promoted First Sergeant, and George A. Hanlin, corporal in
Ralston's place.

In the subsequent operations of the Regiment, during the remainder of
1864, Co. K bore well its part in the general movement of the left of
the Union army the 27th of October, flanking the rebel works at
Armstrong's Mill, on Hatcher's Run, and in the fighting, amid the
rigors of winter, on Hatcher's Run Dec. 8th to 19th, Companies D and K,
under Capt. Linton, doing special guard duty before and about Ft.
Fisher. Again in the early days of February, '65, in repelling the
enemy in an attack on our position about Dabney's Mill, Hatcher's Run.
And K shared in the marked vigilance of camp life in close proximity to
a strong and alert enemy through the winter, and also in the expectancy
of an early spring campaign. The Company had lost others from her roll
as follows: William A. Jackson, discharged Nov. 2, '64; Jesse J.
Morris, transferred to principal musician in the Regiment, Dec. 22,
'64; Henry Dickson, transferred to Veteran Reserve Corps; David McC.
Pry, transferred Feb. 6, '65, to Veteran Reserve Corps; Johnson Toppin,
Feb. 6, '65, transferred to the Veteran Reserve Corps; Norris Metcalf,
died March 17, '65, chronic diarrhoea, at home near Eldersville, Pa.,
and buried in Bethel church cemetery. Two names of persons coming in as
recruits had been added to the roll: Frank Stiver, from West Virginia,
enrolled as private Sept. 22, '64, and George A. Reed, Cross Creek,
Pa., enrolled as private Feb. 27, '65. The number on the roll March 20,
1865, was 53. Of this number Lieut. Cook, Isaac Miller and George
Sprowls were in rebel prisons; Wm. Rea, Wm. Hanlin, Jos. Corbin, Serg't
Boyd, Robert Dungan, D. J. Butterfoss, Silas Cooke, Andrew Chester, B.
F. Hawthorn, George Reed, James Worstell and Robert Meldoon were in
hospitals or serving in the Veteran Reserve Corps. This would leave 38
on the front. Lieut. Sweeney was on Division headquarters staff duty,
and several were on detached or special duty. So that only about 30
were present in line of battle.

On D. McC. Pry's transfer, Feb. 6, '65, Marshall Wright was promoted to
corporal.

On the advance of the 2nd Corps, on March 25, '65, the final campaign
opened. That day brought sadness to Co. K. Great activity was manifest
in both contending armies. The Federal army was moving in arranging its
forces for a forward movement to more closely invest the Confederates.
They were desperate in defence and were trying sorties to break away.
The rifle shooting from the trenches was close. Serg't Smith Graham was
instantly killed, his forehead pierced with the ball of some sharp
shooter. He was carried back into camp and laid in his bunk. It was a
sad blow to the Company for "Smith" was held in very high esteem. As
the army was all astir, he was buried near Fort Welch, and so far as
known his body found there its permanent resting place.

John A. McCalmont was made sergeant in Graham's stead, and Abram
Andrews was promoted to be corporal, taking the place of McCalmont.

Then followed the stern activities which soon brought the fall of
Richmond, Co. K participating in the five days' constant struggle,
crowned with the brilliant dash of Gen. Miles' Division (our Division)
at Sunderland Station, April 2nd. And, Richmond having fallen, Co. K
had its liberal share in the experiences in the rapid and close pursuit
of Gen. Lee's army, in the battles of Tailor's Creek and Farmville--in
the foraging in line of battle as in hot pursuit they passed through a
well stocked plantation at Tailor's Creek, and in the distribution of
Confederate money and other spoils of war in the trains captured in the
Farmville battle. In this latter conflict Sergeants Ralston and
McCalmont and Corporal Abe Andrews were taken prisoners and held till
Lee's surrender. They were asked or rather ordered to give up their
shoes and other effects. This they did in part, when talking and
parleying would not avail. Ralston, through an officer, secured a
pledge for the return of his watch at the close of the war, and when
released he hunted up the party and secured the return of his effects.

When the surrender of Lee's army took place Co. K was on the advanced
line, on the road leading into Appomattox C.H. from the east, and when
Gen. Lee rode back through the lines toward Richmond they stood in
silence, with heads uncovered, as he passed.

The war practically over, K marched leisurely back with the Regiment to
Washington, D.C., and took part in the grand review, being formally
mustered out near Alexandria, Va., May 31, 1865.

The following, according to official records, is the final
disintegration of the Company:

Lieut. William B. Cook, discharged May 17, 1865, by order of the
Secretary of War.

William M. Rea, discharged May 19, 1865, on Surgeon's certificate of
disability.

Corporal William Hanlin, discharged May 20, 1865, G.O. 77 of office of
Adjutant General.

Joseph Corbin, discharged May 20, 1865, G.O. 77 of office of Adjutant
General.

Robert Meldoon, discharged May 20, 1865, G.O. 77 of office of Adjutant
General.

Second Serg't Milton R. Boyd, honorably discharged May 27, 1865.

Robert B. Dungan, honorably discharged May 29, 1865.

George Reed, transferred to 53rd Reg't P.V., S.O. 136 A. of P., May
30, '65.

Daniel J. Butterfoss, discharged from hospital about time Company
mustered out.

George Sprowls, died, drowned on Chesapeake Bay in sinking of a
transport.

Then the 37 mustered out with the Regiment, May 31, '65, near
Alexandria, Va., follows: Capt. Wm. A. F. Stockton, 1st Lieut.
Alexander Sweeney, Jr., 1st Serg't George Ralston, 3rd Serg't Edward S.
Alexander, 4th Serg't Wm. R. H. Powelson, 5th Serg't John A. McCalmont;
Corporals James C. Lyle, Abram Andrews, James K. P. Magill, George A.
Hanlin, Marshall Wright and William Porter; Musician George W.
McConnell; Privates James B. Allison, Peter Andrews, James Arthurs,
James S. Berryhill, Lazarus Briggs, George W. Carter, Jesse M. Carter,
James E. Cochran, Ezra Conaway, James H. Fordyce, William M. Geary,
George W. Johnson, Robert McClurg, Benjamin McCullough, Owen McElfish,
Colin R. Nickeson, Robert A. Pry, William Scott, Nathaniel Seese,
Oliver Staley, Frank Stiver, William Stollar, Ulysses S. Wheeler and
Thomas Wilkin.

Isaac Miller, discharged June 15, 1865, Pittsburg, Pa.

Benjamin L. Hawthorn, discharged June 17, 1865, Washington, D.C.

Andrew Chester, discharged July 3, 1865, hospital, Philadelphia.

Silas Cooke, 1st Corporal, discharged July 3, 1865, Cincinnati, O.

James Worstell, discharged July 5, 1865, Cincinnati, O.

Jesse J. Morris and Thomas L. Noble were mustered out with the
Regiment. John F. Gardner and James L. Noah had final discharge when
artillery mustered out. Geo. Reed, when the 53rd P.V. was mustered
out. David McC. Pry, John W. Nickeson, Isaac Chisholm, Henry Dickson
and Johnson Toppin were finally released when their Regiments in the
Veteran Reserve Corps were disbanded.

On muster out Co. K, with the 140th, was ordered to Pittsburg, Pa., for
final pay and discharge. Our feelings are readily recalled when we
arrived at Pittsburg, where in '62 we had been mustered in. Oh, what
changes wrought in three years! Then three commissioned officers and 93
enlisted men, and 5 recruits had joined us. Now only 37 present, 12 had
been killed in action; 4 died of wounds; 10 died of sickness.
Thirty-seven had been wounded. Many had been discharged on account of
disability. Others had been transferred to other commands and service,
some of whom had made good records for themselves. Many had gone out
beardless boys, but now returned well trained men. All are eager now to
quit the service and to return to their several avocations in a blessed
reign of peace in a nation saved, a Union preserved. The songs of
farewell are hastily sung, and Co. K becomes a thing of the past, each
going his own way, some never again to look into each other's faces,
but a tie of comradeship binding all hearts together that no period of
time can break.

  [Illustration]




Sketches of Those Who Have Died Since the War.


And as the years have come and gone since the disbanding, Company K's
survivors have ever done their part in the reunions and camp fires held
by the Regiment. But so widely scattered have they become that only a
few each year have been able to answer to their names on such
occasions. In nearly a dozen states the present living are to be found.

We cast a look back to the time K was disbanded, and, when asked where
are Co. K's 101 members? we find the numbering to be: _12 killed in
action_; _14 died in the service_; _2 deserted_ and their names are
lost to us; _31 have died since_, and _42 are living yet_. The
_killed_ and _died in service_ have already been mentioned. And the
names of the two _deserters_ have passed from us.

So many years have passed with their burden of business, domestic and
other duties and of engrossing anxieties; so much have memory's
faculties yielded to the demands made upon them as that it has become
difficult to recall details in experience in those crowded years of
service, that the task of gathering data for presenting to the public a
just and impartial record of each one of K's members has been found a
very difficult one; and, despite the writer's most earnest and
persistent efforts through many months of time in search of necessary
information, he regrets his inability to secure such data as he in some
cases longed for. But so far as was within his power he has given the
records impartially, full and correct to the best of his information.
Nothing would he not have done to serve his comrades, each one of whom
was dear to him, and to each of whom he ever felt allied as to a
brother. Gladly does he make mention of anything to the credit or honor
of any one in a Company that sustained so worthy a record as did K,
than which, he hesitates not to assert, no other was superior in point
of excellence, in faithful, devoted, heroic service to our beloved
country.

With a feeling of sadness and in sorrow we record the list of those 31
who died since the Company was disbanded in June, 1865.

 1. William M. Geary, from Candor, Pa., was almost constantly with the
Company, responding cheerfully to every call to duty, exemplary in his
conduct. He was one of five, who though in all the battles, yet escaped
injury. But the severities of the service shattered his constitution,
and he was the first to fall after the return. He suffered terribly
from ulceration of the bowels; but loving friends, among them Jno. A.
McCalmont, and other of his comrades tenderly cared for him. He died
June 25, 1866, and was buried in the home cemetery at Candor.

 2. Colin R. Nickeson, of Claysville, proved himself a worthy soldier.
He was severely wounded in the breast on July 2, '63, at Gettysburg. He
also suffered some from illness. When the Company disbanded at
Pittsburg he returned to his home in East Finley Township. But he
virtually had given his life to his country, for he died from the
effects of wound and the severities of service, April 8, 1867, among
his home friends.

 3. Second Lieutenant William B. Cook, Candor, practically sacrificed
his life on our country's altar. He was taken prisoner July 2, '63, and
confined in Libby prison, never getting back to the Company. He was
among those who through a tunnel tried to escape, but was recaptured.
When discharged in May, '65, he returned home. But his strength was
undermined. He entered on the practice of law in Pittsburg, Pa. But
from lung trouble he died Dec. 30, 1870.

 4. Harrison McConnell, Paris, eager to be with those who went out to
defend the Union, slipped into the service, being duly enrolled as a
member of K, and got as far as Falmouth, Va. But, he being a minor, his
parents appealed to the U.S. Courts; and through the direction of the
Secretary of War, his friends took him from the camp to Washington
City, where a discharge was secured for him. Afterwards through the
recommendation of Senator Cameron, he did service in Washington City up
to time of illness resulting in his death, save one year in which he
was a clerk in the West Virginia House of Representatives. He died at
home, near Paris, Pa., July 17, 1872, and was buried at Florence, Pa.

 5. James S. Berryhill, "Sans" as he was familiarly known, Cross Creek,
was ever a ready soldier and companionable fellow on march, in battle
or in camp. He faced the music all the way, and came through without
injury. But one Sabbath morning, July 19, 1874, in endeavoring to board
a freight train at Dinsmore Crossing, Panhandle railroad, on his way to
Sabbath school, he was accidentally killed, and his mangled body was
given a true soldier's burial in the old graveyard at Burgettstown, Pa.

 6. George Ralston, of Claysville, made a corporal in the organization
of the Company, entered the ranks of soldiery with a truly loyal heart,
leaving his profession of teaching. With the exception of several weeks
in the hospital in '63, he "weathered the storm" with the Company till
the end. Was promoted to First Sergeant on B. F. Powelson's leaving K
to accept a position in another Regiment. But the "wear and tear" of
the service must have made inroads on his vitality, for after a brief
life at home with wife and children, he died from consumption, Aug. 28,
1874, and was buried in Claysville cemetery.

 7. Capt. Wm. A. F. Stockton, Cross Creek, was of a generous and
open-hearted disposition, and served with faithfulness. On the 29th of
July, '63, he was detailed and sent back for duty at the General
Recruiting Station at Pittsburg, where he remained until the summer of
64, returning to command of K, and was with it till the Company was
disbanded, except that on several occasions, by virtue of his rank, he
had command of the Regiment. After the war he embarked in raising fruit
for the New York market, in Carituck, N.C., where through fever he
died, July 21, 1877, and was buried in the old Cross Creek village
graveyard. He was brevetted Major, April 9, 1865.

 8. William Porter, West Alexander, quiet and unassuming, but ever ready
for duty, was another of the lucky ones, about all the time with the
Company, yet never wounded. He was promoted to be Corporal in the room
of Jno. F. Gardner, transferred to an artillery Company Dec. 17, '63.
In the quiet, faithful pursuit of his business, while alighting from a
horse, he was accidentally cut in the neck by a chisel and quickly died
from the wound Dec. 16, 1883, near West Alexander, Pa., in whose
cemetery he lies buried.

 9. Milton R. Boyd, 2nd Sergeant, Claysville, possessed many of the
qualities of a good soldier, and bore well his part through the
campaign of '63 and early part of '64. But the severities of the
service were too much for him, his health was undermined, and in latter
part of term of service he was unable for field duty. After the war was
ended he went into the medical profession, entering on practice in
Silvan Springs, Arkansas. He died in that place from congestion of the
brain May 2, 1884, and was buried there.

10. Johnson Toppin, Millsboro, was wounded in the shoulder, Gettysburg,
second day of July, '63, and thereby rendered unfit for active service,
though ever ready to respond to calls of duty. Towards the close he was
transferred to the Veteran Reserve Corps. Little is known to us of him
after discharge. The only information obtained was that, about the year
1884, he was accidentally drowned near Pittsburg, being thrown from a
river barge.

11. Robert Meldoon, West Alexander, faithfully answered to all duty up
to Gettysburg. There, July 2, '63, he was wounded in face and leg, and
was in hospital or on light service there afterwards. Little seems
known or could be found out of him after his discharge. He was killed
on the railroad at New Castle, Pa., in June, 1885, and was buried
there.

12. William A. Ruffner, Mound City, did not seem to be physically able
for field service. When marching in December, 1862, to the front, he
gave out, and after some time spent in hospital, he was, by direction
of the surgeon in charge, discharged. And all the information we were
able to glean (and that comes from a comrade nearest to him) was that
he was killed sometime in 1886, in the coal mines at Coal Bluff,
Washington county, Pa.

13. Robert B. Dungan, Cross Creek, was not able to continue in the
strenuous service to which the Company was subjected. He was not with
the Company during latter half of our term of service, but did some
detail duty at office and hospital. And after muster out of service he
suffered from disease which had become chronic before his discharge
from the army, and from its effects he died in Leavenworth, Kansas,
Feb. 27, 1888.

14. Thomas L. Noble, Claysville, enlisted as a member of K, but in the
second month of service was promoted to Commissary Sergeant of the
Regiment, and he as such rendered excellent service, watchful for our
comforts and awake to our interests. "Tom," as he was known throughout
the command, was a genius, ready in wit and full of fun, and never
failing, after (as he himself said) he "got his hand in," to see that
the 140th and specially K, received our full share of rations. This
efficient service in the Q.M. Department, seasoned with good humor and
a generous spirit, was followed by a successful career in days of peace
and prosperity. He engaged in real estate and insurance business in the
west. He was noted as a strong and influential advocate of temperance.
His orations in this and in Memorial Day services were characterized
with ability and power. I quote here with pleasure a testimony
concerning Tom, given at a reunion camp fire by Comrade "Sandy" Acheson
(Capt. Alex. W. Acheson, Co. C): "After the war was over he emigrated
to Kansas, where he encountered the various shades of fortune,
sometimes doing well, and at others not, until at last, broken in
health, he floated to Texas. One day I was summoned hastily to see him,
when I found him already dead of heart disease. With all of the honors
a G.A.R. Post could bestow, we laid him to rest, beneath the Bur-oaks
of Texas, to await the reveille which will summon us all together at
the last day. It was in Dennison, Texas, he died, in the month of
September, 1890, and there in the northeast corner of Oakwood Cemetery
buried."

15. James K. McCurdy, Eldersville, when he enlisted in K was a
practicing physician. He was soon detailed as hospital steward and was
on Feb. 17, 1864, discharged by special order from War Department, and
transferred to the 153rd Regiment, P.V., being commissioned Feb. 26,
'64, as Assistant Surgeon, and served as such with credit. He died at
Burgettstown, Pa., Aug 12, 1891.

16. Jesse M. Carter, Millsboro, was a worthy soldier, ever faithful to
his country's service, and never murmuring against the hardships and
privations incident thereto. He was wounded on May 12, '64, but after
recovery from wound he resumed his place in old K to "battle manfully"
till the glorious victory was won and Lee's army was no more. According
to best information received he died some time in 1894.

17. Robert Lyle, Cross Creek, was among the older ones forming the
membership of K. He had the true spirit of service, but it soon became
manifest that he had not the physical strength and endurance essential
to active warfare; so that after the testing in the march to the front
and the severities of duties in the winter season at Falmouth, Va.,
with Lee's army across the river, on certificate of the Surgeon he was
discharged from service. He died July 1, 1894, and was buried in the
cemetery at Cross Creek Village, Pa.

18. James A. Fordyce, Claysville, too, was a man somewhat advanced in
years. But his heart was in the cause of preserving the Union, and he
gave himself unreservedly to soldier life and duty. He was wounded in
the summer of '64, in battle of Deep Bottom, Va., having a thumb shot
off. He was detailed part of time as teamster. He remained with the
Company till the last, though his health and strength were considerably
impaired. He died in Claysville, July 22, '95, age 75 years. His widow,
living yet in Claysville, says that he carried disease from the
exposure and severity of his war service.

19. Daniel J. Butterfoss, Paris, was possibly the oldest man enlisting
in K. In fact too old for the service. He could not endure the testing
in our going to the front, and was sent to the hospital April 21, '63,
and after that never was with the Company, though not discharged till
about the time K was mustered out. He is said to have carried mail till
a good old age, and spent his last days by his choice in the Erie
Soldier's Home, Erie, Pa., where he died of senile paresis, July 29,
1896, and was buried there.

20. John F. Gardner, Paris, the Corporal, readily responded to his
country's call for defenders, and made a fair record for himself. Was
with K only in the Chancellorsville battle, as after that he was on
detached duty, and was on Dec. 17, '63, transferred to service in the
Artillery Brigade. He died in Iowa, Oct. 1, 1896. Corporal Geo. Hanlin,
however, thinks it was in DeKalb County, Ala., in which he died. (The
members of K had in the 40 years since the war closed become so
scattered that it seemed impossible in a few cases to get definite
information. We did the best we could in weeks of visiting and many
months of correspondence.)

21. Isaac W. Chisholm, Candor, was a soldier whose bearing and manner
made a favorable impress upon his comrades; one of more than average
merit, of good business qualities, liked by all who knew him. He was a
little poetic in his literary effusions, as a leaf from his camp fire
reflections will show:

    "Rules and Regulations of the Candor Mess.--Donaldson, McCalmont,
    Geary, Chisholm, Will Powelson and Graham.

    Corporal Donaldson is the cook,
      And Captain of the mess,
    He brings the water from the brook,
      And then sits down to rest.
    The other five get all the wood
      And pile it in the corner,
    And would do more if they could
      To crown themselves with honor.
    Profane swearing is not allowed,
      Or vulgar language used,
    Nor 'acts' that would disgrace the crowd
      If we should be accused.
    A member who should break these rules
      Without regard to beauty,
    Shall be kicked out like army mules
      And placed on double duty.

    Official:                      By command of

      J. W. CHISHOLM,                ISAAC DONALDSON,
        Private and Adjutant.          Corp'l Commanding."

He practiced medicine after the war in South Side, Pittsburg, where he
had been born, until 1877, when with family of wife and children he
located in New Concord, Ohio. There he died from heart trouble, Oct.
20, '97, and was buried in Concord cemetery.

22. Henry Dickson, Dunningsville, was among those always ready for
duty. He was wounded in the battle of Spottsylvania C.H. Was in
hospital till the latter part of '64, when he was transferred to the
Veteran Reserve Corps. Soon after the close of the war he went west,
first to Kansas. He died July 18, 1898, in San Diego, California.
Buried in the Washington (Pa.) cemetery.

23. Edward S. Alexander, West Alexander, 3rd Sergeant, possessed many
of the sterling qualities of a good soldier, never faltering when duty
called to hardships and sacrifices. His business abilities were often
recognized by calls or details to special and some detached duty. This
took him no little from the Company. But he was always found faithful
in the discharge of duty. Was wounded in hand and arm on July 2, '63,
Gettysburg. Tried in the furnace of conflict, the war over, he
re-entered his work of life with determination of success. The writer
regrets his inability to get definite information of him, though he
visited West Alexander in search. One thing seemed certain from the
cemetery records--he was buried there April 26, 1899.

24. Joseph C. Frazier, West Alexander, was with the Company till after
the battle of Chancellorsville, May 1-5, '63. After that he took sick,
was sent to hospital, and was discharged Sept. 30, '63, on Surgeon's
certificate of disability. And the writer failed to get any reliable
information concerning him after his discharge. From the Pension Bureau
it was ascertained that he died Nov. 20, 1900.

25. William R. H. Powelson, Cross Creek, 4th Corporal, was one of K's
most faithful and efficient members. He was a model in industry and
attentiveness to the requirements of camp and field, and was ever
looking ahead to secure best results and promote the best interests of
his comrades and himself. He was promoted Sergeant on the death of
Hayes, Gettysburg, July 2, 1863. He was with the Company all through
its service, save a few months when he was in hospital, having been
severely wounded at Spottsylvania C.H. in the charge on morning of May
12, '64, shot through both thighs as he leaped to the top of the rebel
breastworks. Was in all the important battles. When released from
military duty he moved with his wife and little daughter to his farm in
Dent county, Mo., which he had left in '61 on account of the border
troubles. His spirit of industry and his integrity secured for him a
pleasant and prosperous home and a good record in citizenship. He died
April 16, 1901, and was buried in the Laketon cemetery, Lake Spring,
Mo.

26. James E. Cochran, Paris, was nearly all the time with the Company.
Was absent sick a little, dropped out a little in the severe campaign
of '64, and was on detached duty some. It was almost impossible to get
any data of him after the close of service. James L. Noah said he went
west to Rock Island, in '65. From the Pension Commissioner's records it
appears that he died April 7, 1902, of pneumonia, Barnesville, O., and
was buried in cemetery there.

27. John M. Day, Morris Township, was a good-hearted man, but seemed
physically unable to withstand the hardships of active service. This
was attested on march to the front and in winter work at Falmouth, Va.
Before the winter was over he was sent to the hospital, and there
continued till discharged at Philadelphia, Dec. 12, '63, for
disability. He led a quiet life in his rural home, died from heart
trouble May 30, 1903, and was buried in Fairmount United Brethren
cemetery, East Finley Township.

28. Benjamin McCullough, Candor, was a man of excellent spirit and
truly loyal, but was not physically made for a drilled soldier. He was
detailed April 28, '63, as driver in the Ambulance Corps, and served a
good deal on detached duty. Mustered out with the Company. He died of
dropsy at his home in Steubenville, Ohio, July 15, 1904, while the
writer was about departing for his home in the west, after five weeks
of close work in the interests of the Company history. He was buried in
the soldier's lot in the cemetery. For months he was a great sufferer,
and Comrades Sweeney and Lyle were attentive to his wants and
ministered comfort and aid to him.

  [Illustration: PHOTOS OF THOSE AT IMPROMPTU REUNION, BURGETTSTOWN,
   PA., JUNE 25, 1901

   Peter Andrews, James Worstell, Wm. Stollar, Geo. Johnson, Enoch
   Mounts, Jno. McCalmont, Wm. Rea, Jas. Allison, Jas. C. Lyle, B. F.
   Powelson, D. M. Pry, Alex. Sweeney, Ben. Buchanan, Ulysses Wheeler.]

29. George W. Johnson, East Finley Tp., was as true and faithful a
soldier as K had in its ranks--ever ready for duty. His soldiering was
characterized with cheerfulness, a trait that counted much in the
common soldier experience. He was wounded at Petersburg, Va. He was
practically with the Company all the way from start to finish, and no
one more than he enjoyed the Grand Review in Washington City, and no
one was more pleased than he to return, after the Union was preserved,
to the peaceful life of home amid friends and in time his own family.
He was faithful in the common pursuits of industry. The writer greatly
enjoyed a visit in his home in June, 1904, and when 14 of K met in
Burgettstown, Pa., in an impromptu reunion, he was there, as "happy as
a lark." But in August, being almost totally deaf, as he was crossing a
street at a crossing where the electric car line turned, a car struck
him and the injury therefrom, despite the skill of physician or care of
loving friends, resulted in his death Sept. 10, 1904. Services were
held at his residence, 213 W. Maiden street, Washington, Pa., and the
body laid to rest in the Washington cemetery.

30. Ulysses S. Wheeler, Eldersville, was a noble-hearted fellow and a
worthy soldier. He was closely connected with the fortunes of K
throughout, was slightly wounded at Chancellorsville, May, '63, and was
wounded in the battle of Todd's Tavern, May 8, '64. After the war was
over he was delighted in exchanging the weapons of strife for the
implements of industry; and he ever lived the life of a worthy citizen
on his farm near Eldersville. It was the privilege and great pleasure
of the writer in June, '04, to visit him there and enjoy a few hours
with him and wife. He had been suffering seriously from heart trouble,
but was jovial and contented. He wrote me a cheerful letter just three
weeks before his death. How pained I was when I received a card from
Comrade D. M. Pry, dated Oct. 5, 1904, saying, "Our old Comrade Wheeler
dropped dead this morning on his porch. He had his team hitched up
ready to start to our fair"--Burgettstown, Pa. He was buried at
Steubenville, Ohio.

31. Henderson Scott, Paris, was unable to withstand active soldier
life, and was among the first in K to be discharged. This was when the
140th was at Falmouth, before its first experience in battle, and by a
special order of the War Department. He re-enlisted in the 103rd Reg't,
P. V., when it was stationed at Roanoke Island, N.C., and remained in
garrison duty till the close of the war. Then like many a soldier he
cast his lot in the west and engaged in mining. Was severely injured in
a cave-in. When written to in Eagleville, California, he replied in a
very friendly letter. But in June, 1905, (a letter addressed him being
returned unclaimed) in answer to an inquiry the postmaster at
Sierraville, Calif., wrote me that Henderson Scott died in that place
Feb. 9, 1905, and that he had been buried there. That he had no family.

  [Illustration: Comrades in Colorado

   B. F. POWELSON    J. K. MAGILL    GEO. A. HANLIN]




Sketches of Those Living, Jan. 2, 1906.


And now there remains the mention of the forty-two of old K who are
living. Special effort was made to hear personally from all. Letter
after letter was written to secure this. Personal visits were made to
many and efforts made to see others as far as possible. These personal
interviews were a source of unbounded comfort and pleasure to the
writer. Everywhere he was most cordially received and welcomed. But to
the work before us:

 1. Alexander Sweeney, Jr., First Lieutenant, was in December, '63,
appointed to duty at Division Headquarters, and served on the staff of
Gen. Barlow, and afterwards on the staff of Gen. Miles to the close of
the war. He was a genial and popular staff officer. He received the
rank of Brevet Captain March 13, 1865. Once again in civil life, he
followed the way of his father in mercantile pursuits. For quite a
while he was traveling salesman for the Arbuckle Company, and was very
successful. After that he was engaged some little time in the wholesale
grocery business in Pittsburg and in Youngstown, O. But for the greater
part of time in the last 25 or 30 years he has been associated with an
importing tea concern in New York; and is a rustler still in that
business, with his office in Pittsburg, and his traveling extending
over a good portion of eastern Ohio. "Aleck" still knows a good thing
when he sees it; so he attended the G.A.R. Encampment in Denver,
Colo., Sept. 4-9, '95, and enjoyed a wee Co. K reunion and
entertainment provided by his Colorado comrades, Hanlin, Magill and
Powelson, and visited the writer's home, much to his pleasure. And the
entire family say, "Come again, Uncle Aleck, you're ever welcome!"
Capt. Sweeney and family live in Steubenville, Ohio. His address is
Lock Box 627.

 2. Benjamin F. Powelson, First Sergeant.--Chaplain Milligan says of him
in a college class history, "As Orderly Sergeant of Co. K, 140th P.V.,
for two years he was one of the bravest, quietest, most conscientious
and faithful soldiers in this crack Regiment of veterans. For a long
time he not only did the onerous work of First Sergeant, but really
commanded the Company whilst his superior officers were detailed to
other duties. He was a slender, delicate looking soldier, but he never
flinched in the fight. He was promoted to First Lieutenant Co. G, 41st
U.S.C.T., and was afterwards placed in command of Co. I of the same
Regiment. He was never wounded, though he was always in the front, and
participated in the battles of Chancellorsville, Gettysburg, Bristoe
Station, Deep Bottom, Ream's Station, Petersburg, Appomattox and many
other smaller engagements. He was in the advance line at the surrender
of Lee, the last in the fight, under Sheridan; after which he was
ordered with his Regiment to the Rio Grande border." He was mustered
out in New Orleans in October, 1865. Col. Moore, editor of the
Washington Reporter, on hearing this, wrote, "Among the thousands of
our youth who went out to confront the foes of our government on the
field of battle, no more worthy was to be found than Lieut. Powelson,
nor one who will be more warmly welcomed on his return." He entered the
full work of the ministry, in the Presbyterian church, in July, '67,
and has been ever since in active work, in Missouri, Kansas and
Colorado. And any of the old comrades will ever find an open door for
them and a welcome in his home in Boulder. His address is Box 143,
Boulder, Colo.

 3. John A. McCalmont was a number one soldier and was attentive and
obedient to every call to duty. He won the high esteem of his comrades.
He was twice promoted. To Corporal on the death of Donaldson, Feb. 14,
'63, and to Sergeant when Graham was killed, March 25, 1865. He was
fortunate in all our engagements only receiving a slight wound. He
shared the fate of being a prisoner with Ralston and Abe Andrews, 24 of
the 140th and 26 of the 26th Michigan being taken in battle near
Farmville and released the third day after, at Lee's surrender. After
his return home he took up the role of a good citizen and became a
happy, prosperous farmer, and the writer, having spent several nights
in his home, most gladly proclaims Comrade McCalmont and his wife
princely entertainers. His address is Bulger, Washington Co., Pa.

 4. Silas Cooke, 1st Corporal, proved himself a true soldier, and,
though not of a strong or robust constitution, yet he stood bravely the
soldier requirements, voluntarily on duty sometimes when he ought not
to have been. He was practically disabled by a wound at Spottsylvania
and was in hospital until Jan. 24, '65, when from the hospital in
Pittsburg, Pa., he was transferred for service in the 6th Regiment of
the Veteran Reserve Corps, Johnson's Island, Ohio. He was finally
discharged July 3, '65, Cincinnati, Ohio. After the war he resumed his
work of education and graduated from college and Theological Seminary.
Entered the full ministry in the Presbyterian church in '75, and has
made an excellent record in the noble cause he espoused. His
perseverance in scholarly attainments and his fidelity have been
recognized in the bestowal on him of the degree of Doctor of Divinity.
His address is Red Oak, Iowa, where he is pastor of the First
Presbyterian church.

 5. John D. McCabe, 2nd Corporal, while willing and ready to shoulder
his musket in the defense and preservation of his country, found
himself physically unable to withstand the rigors of active military
service, and he was discharged. His few months' association with the
members of the Company established in him a strong attachment to them,
and he enjoys the "touch of elbow" with them still. The writer, in his
hunting for the boys and their doings, found him actively engaged in
mercantile business and enjoying home life in Burgettstown, Pa., where
he can be found or addressed. That he appreciates yet his membership
in K was evidenced in his and his wife's presence at the G.A.R.
Encampment in Denver, and visit to each of the three members now
living in Colorado.

 6. William Hanlin, 8th Corporal, was a little above the average age of
the members of K, and enlisted from a deep sense of duty; and with
great fidelity he took up the burden of soldiering. But the Johnnies'
musket balls and shells at Gettysburg put a quietus on his active
service, and he was sent to the hospital at York, Pa., where after
treatment, he did light duty under direction of the surgeons, but they
did not report him for duty on account of disability in left leg. When
visited in June, '04, he was presiding well over an ideal farmer's
Pennsylvania home, and his true comradeship was evidenced by
large-hearted hospitality. His address is Hanlin Station, Washington,
Pa., R.D. No. 55.

 7. David McC. Pry, with commendable zeal, earnestness and efficiency
participated in the services rendered by the Company. He was promoted
Corporal on the death of his uncle, on the eve of the Gettysburg
campaign. In the famous charge of Hancock's Corps at Spottsylvania,
Va., he was wounded. He was cared for at the Finley hospital,
Washington, D.C. On recovery he was examined and transferred to the
Veteran Reserve Corps, and the surgeon placed him in charge of Ward No.
1. He remained in such service till all were sent home, or to their
different state hospitals, sometime after Lee's surrender. Then, after
assisting the Quarter Master in tabulating and turning over to
government officials the property, he received his final dischargee.
Since then the following may be said of him: Merchandizing for 32
years; Notary Public and Justice of the Peace 30 years; ruling elder in
the Presbyterian church 30 years; commissioner to the General Assembly
of same in Chicago; Recorder of Washington county 1885-'87; twice
Chairman of Republican convention; twice delegate to Republican State
convention; member of Legislature of Pennsylvania 1897-'98; member of
the Pennsylvania State Board of Agriculture 1899-1904; at present
Notary Public and conducting a successful insurance and general
conveyancing business. His address is Lock Box 404, Burgettstown, Pa.,
where he has long enjoyed residence, to the kind hospitalities and
courtesies of whose home the writer can give ample attestation.

 8. James K. P. Magill was an out-and-out, all-round volunteer soldier;
among the lucky ones in nearly every battle and scrimmage and never
shed blood; full of good nature and of valuable service to the Company.
He was promoted Corporal July 2, '63, when Will Powelson was made a
Sergeant. He is justly an heir to a very high degree of comradeship
among the veterans, and he greatly enjoys the same. On muster out he
assumed duties of faithful citizenship in the old home community until
in '88, when he moved with his family to Pueblo, Colo., and he there
entered mercantile pursuits, winning a comfortable home and a
successful trade by his integrity and good business methods. You will
find him, as of yore, ever in good humor, at the Central Mesa grocery,
100 Block P, Pueblo, Colo.

 9. James C. Lyle was a willing, quiet and faithful member; but, not
being very robust, he was subject to illness, and was several times in
the hospital; and he can relate some interesting and rather stirring
experiences in these times of absence from the Company; as when he was
fitted (?) out in a Washington hospital for going home to vote, and
when in May, '64, with other sick and wounded, he was several days a
prisoner under Fitzhugh Lee, and the federal and rebel officers had
a gala time with the hospital _stimulants_, and again when he, in
rejoining Company near Cold Harbor, was so hungry and completely worn
out on reaching division headquarters about dark, and receiving from
Lieut. Sweeney beef and hard-tack, gathered sticks, prepared and ate
his royal meal, the bullets rattling thick about him, one wounded near
him, and then lay down and slept; and never more glad in his life than
when next day he got back among his comrades in K. And from that on to
the close of the war he was with the Company. He was promoted Corporal
when Graham was made 5th Sergeant, March 17, '64. As he was a true
soldier, he has ever been a true and worthy citizen, successful in
farming and happy in home life. His address now is East Liverpool,
Ohio.

10. George A. Hanlin was found to be of good material for a soldier,
and the hospital never got him but for a while in the middle part of
'63. He had the aptitude of getting his full share of the sunshine of
army life, and therefore was a valuable member of K. He was advanced
to rank of Corporal in the promotion of Ralston to be First Sergeant.
The rebels had a pick at George, at Spottsylvania, on May 12, '64,
claiming his head, but luckily for him they only got a piece of his
ear, and he confronted them in the very next onset and ever after.
Peace established, he resumed work on the home farm; but soon moved to
Missouri, and in the 70's cast his lot in Colorado, first in mining a
short time, then in the feed and fuel business in Denver, in which he
succeeded well. And those who were fortunate enough to attend the
39th National G.A.R. Encampment can testify to his and family's
open-heartedness and generous contributions to the comfort and
pleasure of all old comrades. And he will ever be found the same,
at 3800 Palmer street, Denver, Colo. And to any comrade coming to
Colorado, seeking a home therein or the comfort and blessing of its
ozone and sunshine, he stands ready to give information and aid.

11. Marshall Wright, though last on the roll, was among the first in
readiness to respond to all just requirements. He was in hospital at
Washington, D.C., several months after Chancellorsville battle. In the
terrible conflict on May 12, '64, at Spottsylvania, he had a close
call. He was shot in the neck. He had a prominent "Adam's Apple," and
so had enough and to spare and live over it, and, after a short sojourn
with the surgeon, he took his place again in line to hold it till the
Company was mustered out. His life since has been a success, and he
still delights in the comradeship of "old Company K." He was promoted
Corporal in the transfer of D. M. Pry, Feb. 6, '65. His home is in
Elwood, Lawrence Co., Pa.

12. Abram Andrews and his brother Peter were well known in the Company
as quiet, good men, "boys" as they were called, for they were small in
stature. Abram was sick some and in hospital, but for the most part was
with the Company. He received a slight wound at Todd's Tavern, but four
days afterwards was in line in that great day of victory for the 2nd
Corps at Spottsylvania, during which he and Norris Metcalf helped to
carry off the rebel cannon in face of desperate firing. He was promoted
Corporal to fill vacancy as McCalmont was advanced to rank of 5th
Sergeant, March 25, '65. On April 7th, in battle near Farmville, he was
taken prisoner along with Ralston and McCalmont. He ever rejoices to
say he belonged to "dear old Co. K." His address is Latrobe, Athens
county, Ohio, R.D. No. 1.

13. Jesse J. Morris was one of K's "rooters" (in the parlance of modern
athletics), a No. 1 drummer boy, 17 years old when sworn in and had to
"tiptoe it to reach the measuring stick." He enlisted as a private and
served in the ranks till some time in March, '63, being in Co. K's
first detail sent out on picket on the Rappahannock. He was then put in
Drum Corps. He soon was leader of the snare drummers, and, when Johnnie
Bryan was detailed as Adjutant's clerk, he was made Drum Sergeant, and
had charge of the Corps from that time until appointed Drum Major, Dec.
22, '64, and transferred to Regimental non-commissioned staff. Was with
the Regiment through all its marchings, campaigns and engagements.
Never away but 15 days, and that on furlough during winter of '64 and
'65. Never answered the surgeon's call but twice, and that for chills
when "we lay in go-for-holes in front of Petersburg, supporting Battery
5." His old blue drum hangs in a prominent place in his house,
bequeathed to his son. He is a "drummer" still, but now a successful
salesman for A. F. Bannister & Co., cutlery manufacturers, Newark, N.
J. And his home and address is 7514 Kelly street, Pittsburg, Pa.

14. George W. McConnell was enlisted as a musician. Practically he
never lost a day from service. After the battle of Gettysburg he was
left there in charge of three men of Co. H and color-bearer Riddle of
Co. F. He returned to the Regiment in October, when camped near
Warrenton, Va. About Jan. 1, '64, he was detailed by Gen. Hancock in
Drum Corps, at Division headquarters, and was in that till the close of
war. He was one of two out of 150 musicians who kept up with the
ambulance train and reported to Dr. Wishart, in rear of our line at
Petersburg, June 14, '64, the night of the crossing of the James. Was
at the Grand Review and the disbanding of the Company. Returned to old
home, but in '71 went to Kansas, then in '75 back to Ohio, and for 25
years has had a good home and prosperous business (black-smithing) in
Carrollton, Ohio, where he will gladly welcome any of K Company.

15. James B. Allison was very faithful and steady in service. He was
absent but once, then about four months in sickness, sent from Deep
Bottom to Chestnut Hill hospital, Philadelphia. Special mention has
been made of him at Gettysburg. He was conscientious in trying to do
his duty, and wrote me when I sought of him some information: "Now
after all these years have come and gone, I look back from the western
slope of life to those bloody days with some feelings of pride for
having done what I could to save the nation in its entirety, and also
with sadness as I still remember and think of the boys that laid down
their lives that the country might live." His address is, Prosperity,
Washington Co., Pa., via Dunn's Station.

16. Peter Andrews, to whom reference has already been made, was sick
and in hospitals in Washington and Philadelphia from June, '63 to July
'64. He rejoined us in time for the Deep Bottom engagement, and was
with the Company until the disbanding. He tells us of what he saw on
April 8, '65, near Farmville, on the field of conflict where the
charges were made the day before in which his brother was taken
prisoner. The dead lay thick, in some places the bodies of Union and
rebel soldiers crossing each other. He also says that he and Geo.
Johnson turned over to headquarters two rebel prisoners on that same
7th. When met June 25, '04 at the K gathering, Burgettstown, Pa., he
was extremely happy, reporting himself as having a family of nine
children and fourteen grandchildren, all proud of his army record and
associations, his good wife affirming "one of the grandest Regiments in
the Civil War." His address is Mount Oliver, Pittsburg, Pa.

17. James Arthurs was a good-hearted, trustworthy man, ever ready to
serve his country. He was not, however, quick to learn the manual of
arms, or military maneuvers. So he served mostly on detached duty as
Regimental teamster, and was faithful to duty till the muster out. No
word received from him directly. His address is Toronto, Jefferson Co.,
Ohio.

18. Lazarus Briggs was a quiet, good dispositioned fellow, somewhat on
the reserve, and at times a little hard to understand. He was slightly
wounded in the back at Chancellorsville. He was ever ready for any camp
or general soldier duty, but had a special dislike to the way the
rebels came at us generally. Yet towards the last the dislike somewhat
disappeared--we all got a little familiar with the Johnnies' ways--and
he stuck to his post of duty in all service, and was with the Company
till it disbanded. He still enjoys meeting with his comrades, and lives
in comfort and content with his family in Houston, Washington Co., Pa.

19. Benjamin B. Buchanan was characterized with a strong, patriotic
spirit, and entered the service with best intent. But he found that he
was physically unable to endure the hardships of stern army life. And,
after trying to overcome hindrances for some months to no purpose, he
was discharged for disability from hospital in Washington, D.C., where
he was during our first engagement, Chancellorsville. His disability
was increased by exposure in camp duty, and thus far he made sacrifice
for the cause, a sacrifice he realizes always. And his comrades
sympathize, too, with him in the loss of his partner in life, who died
a few years ago. His home is in Paris, Washington Co., Pa.

20. George W. Carter. Co. K had several sets of brothers in it: Will
and Ben Powelson; Abe and Pete Andrews; George and Harry McConnell; Tom
and George Carter; Joe and Dave Corbin; Ben and Jim Cummins; William
and Isaac Miller; John and Colin Nickeson; Robert and Dave Pry; and
George and Jesse Sprowls. The Carter brothers had a cousin Jesse. All
three were excellent soldiers. Tom fell bravely fighting at Gettysburg,
George was wounded at Spottsylvania as bravely fighting, but was able
to rejoin the Company, and then he stayed with it to the end. No direct
word was received from him, but his address is Millsboro, Washington
Co., Pa.

21. Andrew Chester was one of the most ready and willing to do service
in K. He was sure to be in everything going on. He was slightly wounded
by a piece of shell in his right ankle at Chancellorsville, and he was
severely wounded in left leg June 6, '64, at Cold Harbor, Va., and was
never with the Company afterwards. He was discharged from service when
in hospital at Philadelphia, July 3, '65. And now in the busy life he
is leading, as his impaired health and strength will permit, he is
eager to embrace every opportunity to touch elbows with his comrades,
and thinks, as he revels in the memories of our many well-fought
battles that nothing too good can be said in praise of "Old Co. K." His
address is Eighty-four, Washington Co., Pa., R.D. No. 84.

22. Ezra Conaway shared in the duties of the soldier as required of the
members of this Company up to the time when the arrangements were being
consummated for the Chancellorsville engagement. On April 26, '63, he
was detailed on detached duty and served after that as teamster, or in
the wagon train department, and became a wagon-master, was mustered out
with the Company. No word could be gotten from him, but D. M. Pry
reports his address--Monongahela City, Washington Co., Pa.

23. Joseph A. Corbin was with the Company in the faithful performance
of his duties till the battle of Gettysburg, wherein he was wounded in
the leg. He was discharged from the service from the hospital, May 20,
'65, and returned to his work on the farm. His address is Eldersville,
Washington Co., Pa., via Hanlin Station.

24. George Gardner was among a few, who, on the Company's being
subjected to the ordeal of active duties "on the field" or confronting
the enemy, were found physically incapacitated--unable to stand the
strain. So he was, on March 20, '63, discharged under General Order No.
77, War Department. And we were unable to get any satisfactory
information about him. Obtaining his address as Beaver, Beaver county,
Oklahoma, letters were addressed to him there, which, while not
returned to writer, were never answered.

25. Benjamin F. Hawthorn possessed many of the good qualities of a true
soldier. Prompt to respond to duty's calls, willing to share in the
burdens of service, taking trying conditions in a good-humored way, and
devoted to the cause for which he fought, he could be relied upon in
camp, on march and amid conflict. He was wounded by gunshot in right
shoulder at Spottsylvania, May 12, '64, and thereby disabled for field
service, but was, on the wound healing, transferred to Invalid Corps,
and did duty about hospitals in Washington City, from which he was
discharged in June, '65. He has ever evinced a strong attachment to his
comrades, specially to those of Co. K. Is engaged in the sale of books,
and enjoys home life. His address now is Box 199, California,
Washington Co., Pa.

26. Robert McClurg, soon after the Regiment joined the Army of the
Potomac at Falmouth, Va., was assigned to duty in the Pioneer Corps,
and sustained a good record for fidelity and efficiency in that
department of service to close of war, being ordered back to Company
for Grand Review and muster out. Then he went back to and has ever
enjoyed the peaceful scenes and happy experiences of rural life, ever
having an open heart for any member of K. The writer on a visit to his
place, with Comrade Wm. Hanlin, in 1904, saw the large apple tree,
grown from the two grafts out of the slips sent home by him from
Virginia, to which reference has been previously made. He, too, can
tell of some lively scraps with the Johnnies, who were always averse to
the laying down of pontoons or to the construction of roads, etc. His
address is Paris, Washington Co., Pa.

27. Owen McElfish was not a very robust fellow, but wiry and
well-disposed. He was in hospital during the engagement at
Chancellorsville; after that, with the Regiment about all the time.
Never had a furlough. Received a flesh wound in leg April 5, '65, but
kept with the Company and shared in the capture of Lee's headquarter
train (or part of it) with flags, money and apple-jack. Of the latter,
he says two wagon loads, and "we had a good time that night and next
morning. Adjutant Ray said the 140th could lick the rebel army." Since
the war closed Owen has managed to take good care of himself; but, in
impaired health and strength, he feels the sacrifice he has made in the
nation's defence. His address is Rainsburg, Bedford county, Pa.

28. Isaac Miller proved to be a good and most reliable soldier. At
Todd's Tavern, May 8, '64, as stated heretofore, he was wounded
severely in leg and was left on field; taken prisoner; kept a month or
more, but fractured bone never set; paroled and sent back through
lines; at Annapolis in hospital a while, then sent home to vote, and at
Pittsburg, Pa., on June 15, '65 received his discharge papers. After
discharge had the ball taken out, it having lodged in back part of limb
and had been there for over a year. He is badly crippled, not able to
do any work. In '84 went with family to Kansas. In '93 went to the
health resort, Eureka Springs, Arkansas, where he now resides.

29. Enoch Mounts was with the Company, sharing in all its requirements,
up to April, '63, but was in the hospital during the movements about
Fredericksburg and Chancellorsville. On opening of Gettysburg campaign
he was with the guards of the hospital train. Discharged Aug. 22, '63.
He re-enlisted Feb. 14, '64 in Co. A, 100th Regiment P.V. Wounded in
Wilderness May 6, '64, in arm and breast. Final discharge on May 15,
'65. He is in the firm of Enoch Mounts & Son, painters and paper
hangers; residence 63, Sumner Ave., Washington, Pa.

30. John W. Nickeson was a very quiet but ever trustworthy soldier. He
was wounded at Chancellorsville, having a thumb shot off, and was
unfitted for field service. When wound healed he did duty to close of
war in the Veteran Reserve Corps. The war ended, he returned to the
farm, where ever since he has lived a good upright citizen, though of
late years in broken health. His address is Claysville, Pa., R.F.D.
No. 63.

31. James L. Noah met faithfully all the requirements of the service in
the Company until Dec. 17, '63, when he was transferred to Battery B,
1st Rhode Island Light Artillery, 2nd Corps Artillery Brigade. In
spring of '64 he was transferred to Battery C, 1st Independent
Pennsylvania Light Artillery, holding the rank of Sergeant. Discharged
at Washington, D.C., June 8, '65. In July, same year, he went with Jim
Cochran to Rock Island, Ill. Was in west till '93, holding while there
several positions of trust, but losing his wife by death in '91. Is at
present in the employ of the Pittsburg Coal Co. He wrote us, "I hold
all comrades of Co. K more dear to my heart than all the rest of
humanity." Address, Box 93, Sturgeon, Pa.

32. Robert A. Pry was practically on duty throughout term of
enlistment, an evenly tempered soldier, and contributing his full share
of the good humor of the Company. After battle of Gettysburg he was
detained for service at field hospital and other places for some little
time, and then he rejoined us. At Todd's Tavern the Johnnies gave it to
him in the left foot, causing his absence from the ranks about two
months. Then he favored the Company with his presence to the end, and
says he can never forget the day when old K stood on the skirmish line
at Appomattox as the flag of truce came out in its front from Lee,
seeking terms of surrender. He has in his riper years been sitting to
dispense the laws of his preserved country as Justice of the Peace. And
he avails himself of every opportunity to keep in touch with his old
comrades. His address is Lazearville, W. Va. (Brooke Co.)

33. William M. Rea was among the many noble-hearted farmer boys in K
who at their country's call "hastened to the field of battle," "Clif"
Hayes, his neighbor, being the first to fall. Will Rea bore full his
share in sacrifice for the country we saved. At Todd's Tavern, May 8,
'64, he was shot through the ankle with a musket ball, and at field
hospital had his foot amputated that night. After he was struck he
crawled back quite a distance till his knees were all sore, and, the
line falling back past him, two of Co. B carried him till they were
ordered by Gen. Miles to leave him and to go into a ravine nearby and
carry off one of the General's wounded aids, and in a short time Gen.
Miles dispatched a stretcher and had Rea conveyed to hospital. After
ten days at Fredericksburg he was taken to a hospital in Washington
City, where he remained for fully a year, and therefrom was discharged
May 19, '65. He suffered ever after, the stump never healing over,
until in June, 1904, 40 years afterward, when in the Mercy Hospital,
Pittsburg, he had a reamputation, the stump this time healing nicely.
He enjoys good health and is a good, practical farmer, enjoying
neighborship with that ever reliable comrade Johnnie McCalmont. His
address is Bulger, Washington Co., Pa., R.D. No. 50.

34. William Scott was with the Company nearly all the time, having on
two occasions been on detached duty a short time. He evinced
commendable pluck on marches, for though he suffered much from sore
(tender) feet, he was determined to keep up. His fidelity to the
company in its strenuous service made strong the tie which binds him
still to its members. He in days of peace has lived to enjoy the fruits
of victories won. In June, 1904, the writer, with Comrade Wheeler,
visited his lovely home and enjoyed a royal dinner with him and wife.
His address is Avella, Washington Co., Pa., R.D. No. 2.

35. Nathaniel Seese served mostly as Company cook, or in some way in
the commissary department. He was with us in the battle of
Chancellorsville, and took part in the Company's last battle at
Farmville. Was mustered out with the Company. We were unable to gather
any satisfactory information concerning him since the muster out, and
could not hear from him, having written often. To best of word obtained
his address is 118 Allen St., 31st Ward, Pittsburg, Pa.

36. Oliver Staley, with one exception, was practically with the Company
through all its service. During the Wilderness campaign in '64 he was
in the hospital and rejoined the Company before Petersburg in time for
the Second Deep Bottom engagement in Aug. '64. With Comrade Johnson the
writer enjoyed a pleasant visit with him in his home in West
Washington, his address being 67 Canton avenue, Washington, Pa.

37. William Stollar was another member of K generally found on hand
ready for any duty. He was wounded at Spottsylvania, May 12, '64, but
had his consolation in the fact of having taken part in one of the most
successful charges of the war, which won for Gen. Hancock the rank of
Major General in the U.S. Army. He, too, very highly prizes his
membership in K of the 140th P.V., and availed himself of every
opportunity to assist in the gathering of data for this history. He has
ever enjoyed the farm life in the community from which he enlisted. His
address is Claysville, Pa., R.F.D. No. 63.

38. Thomas Wilkin was only away from the Company from Dec. '63 to
April, '64, when he was detached as teamster in the 2nd Corps Artillery
Brigade. He was one of the lucky ones whom the rebels could not hit,
though often they came "mighty close" to it. Some say he did get a
buckshot in the hand at Todd's Tavern battle. He seems to have
forgotten it. He lives happily on his farm "near the church and the
school house," in his adopted state--Missouri, having raised a
good-sized family. His love for his comrades never wavers. His address
is Kingston, Mo., R.F.D. No. 1.

39. James Worstell never failed to answer to duty's call in K's varied
experiences so far as the Orderly Sergeant remembers, until in that
fatal charge under Col. Brody at Todd's Tavern the rebels "spotted
him," giving him a severe wound in the left knee, and he was thereby
unfitted for K's further marches and fights. But after a nine months'
siege in hospitals he did service in the Veteran Reserve Corps three
months in Johnson's Island, Lake Erie, guarding rebel prisoners, and
then in Cincinnati, receiving his discharge there July 5, '65. He has
enjoyed a good degree of success in life, and can boast of having
raised a goodly number of stalwart sons of the veteran, and of having
constant touch with members of old K. He can speak for himself at 209
Jefferson avenue, Canonsburg, Pa.

40. William A. Jackson, of Florence, Pa., was not with the Company
much, coming in as a recruit just on the eve of the "on to Richmond"
campaign in '64, and not being able to endure the severities of the
service was absent considerably, and was discharged on the 2nd day of
November that year. No answer was received from him. His address was
given by his sister as Lincoln Place, Allegheny Co., Pa.

41. Frank Stiver, of West Virginia, did not enter the Company till late
in September, '64, and was not known by the writer. He was a good
soldier, remaining with the Company till its muster out, May 31, '65.
No reply came from him to letters addressed him. His address was given
as Harmony, Butler county, Pa.

42. George A. Reed, of Cross Creek Township, was a recruit, but did not
enter the Company till Feb. 27, '65, and consequently received his
initiation in the final campaign of the war. On May 30, '65, by Special
Order 136 of Army of the Potomac, he was transferred to the 53rd
Regiment of Pa. Vols. When finally mustered out he settled down on a
farm near Eldersville. No reply to communications sent him as to date.
His address is Hanlin Station, Washington Co., Pa., R.D. No. 54.




Recapitulation of Battles, Casualties, Etc.


1.--Battles, Skirmishes, Reconnaissances-in-Force.

     1. May 1-5, 1863              Chancellorsville, Va.
     2. July 1-4, 1863             Gettysburg, Pa.
     3. July 14, 1863              Falling Water, Md.
     4. July 22, 1863              Ashby's Gap, Va.
     5. {Aug. 31,      }
        {Sept. 4, 1863 }           U.S. Ford, Rappahannock River
     6. Sept. 12, 1863             Culpepper C.H., Va.
     7. Sept. 17-30, 1863          Rapidan, s.w. Culpepper C.H.
     8. Oct. 14, 1863              Auburn Mill, Va.
     9. Oct. 14, 1863              Bristoe Station, Va.
    10. Nov. 29-30, 1863           Mine Run, Va.
    11. Feb. 6, 1864               Morton's Ford, Rapidan River
    12. May 3, 1864                Ely's Ford, Rapidan River
    13. May 5-6, 1864              Wilderness, Va.
    14. May 8, 1864                Todd's Tavern, Va.
    15. May 10-11, 1864            West of Spottsylvania C.H., Va.
    16. May 12, 1864               Spottsylvania C.H., Va.
    17. May 21, 1864               Guinea Station, Va.
    18. May 23-26, 1864            Hanover Junction, Va.
    19. May 29-31, 1864            Totopotomy Creek, Va.
    20. June 2-12, 1864            Cold Harbor, Va.
    21. June 13, 1864              Charles City, Va.
    22. June 15, 1864              Petersburg, Va.
    23. July 27, 1864              Deep Bottom, Va.
    24. Aug. 14-16, 1864           Deep Bottom, or White'sTavern, Va.
    25. Aug. 28, 1864              Ream's Station, Va.
    26. Oct. 30, 1864              On Hatcher's Run, Va.
    27. Dec. 10, 1864              Hatcher's Run, Va.
    28. Feb. 6, 1865               Dabney's Mill, Va.
    29. April 2, 1865              Sutherland Station, Va.
    30. April 5, 1865              Jetersville, Va.
    31. April 6, 1865              Sailor's Creek, Va.
    32. April 7, 1865              Farmville, Va.
    33. April 9, 1865              Appomattox, Va.


2.--(a) Casualties.--Killed in Action.

     1. Thomas C. Hayes            Gettysburg, July 2, 1863
     2. Thomas J. Carter           Gettysburg, July 2, 1863
     3. Robert W. Hull             Gettysburg, July 2, 1863
     4. William H. Miller          Gettysburg, July 2, 1863
     5. Jesse M. Sprowls           Gettysburg, July 2, 1863
     6. John Maloy                 Todd's Tavern, May 8, 1864
     7. John W. Tucker             Todd's Tavern, May 8, 1864
     8. Benjamin H. Cummins        Spottsylvania, May 12, 1864
     9. James A. Cummins           Spottsylvania, May 12, 1864
    10. Joseph Guess               Spottsylvania, May 12, 1864
    11. John Makeown               Spottsylvania, May 12, 1864
    12. Joseph Smith Graham        Petersburg, Va., March 25, 1865


(b) Died in Service.

     1. John Marshall, Nov. 17, 1862, in Regimental Hospital,
            Parkton, Md.
     2. John Henderson, Dec. 7, 1862, in Regimental Hospital,
            Parkton, Md.
     3. Andrew B. Davis, Dec. 9, 1862, in Regimental Hospital,
            Parkton, Md.
     4. Isaac Donaldson, Feb. 14, 1863, in Reg. Hosp. Camp, near
            Falmouth, Va.
     5. Isaac Golden, April 15, 1863, in Hospital, Mt. Pleasant, D.C.
     6. David W. Corbin, April 21, 1863, Stanton Hospital,
            Washington, D.C.
     7. William L. Pry, from wound, May 21, 1863, in Camp Hospital,
            near Falmouth, Va.
     8. George Morrow, May 25, 1863, in Hospital, Washington, D.C.
     9. Robert Virtue, from wound, Sept. 9, in Hospital, Baltimore, Md.
    10. Benjamin F. Earnest, Dec. 14, 1863, in Camp, near Stevensburg,
            Va.
    11. Samuel K. Shindle, March 17, 1864, in Andersonville Prison,
            Georgia.
    12. Michael Daugherty, March 18, 1864, from kick of a mule,
            Brandy Station, Va.
    13. Norris Metcalf, March 18, 1865, at home, near Eldersville, Pa.
    14. George Sprowls, May, 1865, drowned in Chesapeake Bay.


(c) Wounded.

     1. Edward S. Alexander, in hand and arm, Gettysburg,
            July 2, 1863.
     2. Samuel K. Shindle, and taken prisoner, Gettysburg,
            July 2, 1863.
     3. Silas Cooke, in right side, Spottsylvania, May 12, 1864.
     4. William R. H. Powelson, in both hips, Spottsylvania,
            May 12, 1864.
     5. William Hanlin, in hand and leg, Gettysburg, July 2, 1863.
     6. Abram Andrews, slightly in side, Todd's Tavern, May 8, 1864.
     7. Lazarus Briggs, slightly in back, Chancellorsville, May 3,
            1863.
     8. George Carter, Spottsylvania, May 12, 1864.
     9. Jesse M. Carter, Spottsylvania, May 12, 1864.
    10. Andrew Chester, slightly in right ankle, Chancellorsville,
            May 3, 1863. Severe gunshot in leg, Cold Harbor, June 6,
            1864.
    11. Isaac Chisholm, in thigh, Gettysburg, July 2, 1863.
    12. Joseph Corbin, in leg, Gettysburg, July 2, 1863.
    13. Henry Dickson, Spottsylvania, May 12, 1864.
    14. Benjamin F. Earnest, in face badly, Gettysburg, July 2, 1863.
    15. James H. Fordyce, thumb shot off, Deep Bottom, July 27, 1864.
    16. George A. Hanlin, in ear, Spottsylvania, May 12, 1864.
    17. Benjamin F. Hawthorn, through right shoulder, Spottsylvania,
            May 12, 1864.
    18. George W. Johnson, Petersburg, June 15, 1864.
    19. John A. McCalmont, slight in foot, Chancellorsville, May 3,
            1863.
    20. Owen McElfish, flesh wound in leg, Sailor's Run, April 6,
            1865.
    21. Robert Meldoon, in face and leg, Gettysburg, July 2, 1863.
    22. Isaac Miller, totally disabled, Todd's Tavern, May 8, 1864.
    23. Enoch Mounts, in arm and breast, Wilderness, May 6, 1864.
    24. Colin Nickeson, in breast, Gettysburg, July 2, 1863.
    25. John W. Nickeson, thumb shot off, Chancellorsville, May 3,
            1863.
    26. Robert A. Pry, left foot, Todd's Tavern, May 8, 1864.
    27. Wm. L. Pry, finger shot off accidentally, Chancellorsville,
            May 3, 1863.
    28. David McC. Pry, Spottsylvania, May 12, 1864.
    29. William M. Rea, in ankle severely, Todd's Tavern, May 8,
            1864.
    30. George Sprowls, Spottsylvania, May 12, 1864.
    31. William Stollar, through both thighs, Spottsylvania,
           May 12, 1864.
    32. Johnson Toppin, in shoulder, Gettysburg, July 2, 1863.
    33. Robert Virtue, severely in breast, Gettysburg, July 2, 1863.
    34. Ulysses S. Wheeler, slightly at Chancellorsville, and
            again more severely, Todd's Tavern, May 8, 1864.
    35. Thomas Wilkin, in hand, Todd's Tavern, May 8, 1864.
    36. James Worstell, in left knee, Todd's Tavern, May 8, 1864.
    37. Marshall Wright, in Adam's apple, Spottsylvania, May 12,
            1864.


(d) Prisoners.

     1. 2nd Lieut. Wm. B. Cook, July 2, 1863. Held to close of War.
     2. Sergeant Samuel K. Shindle, July 2, 1863. Held till death in
            Andersonville.
     3. Isaac Miller, May 8, 1864, Todd's Tavern. Held over a month
            and paroled.
     4. George Sprowls, May 12, 1864, Spottsylvania. Held till close
            of War.
     5. 1st Serg't. George Ralston, April 1, 1865, Farmville. Held
            till Lee's surrender, April 9, 1865.
     6. Corpl. John McCalmont, April 7, 1865. Held till Lee's
            surrender, April 9, 1865.
     7. Corpl. Abram Andrews, April 7, 1865. Held till Lee's
           surrender, April 9, 1865.


3.--Promotions.

    Capt. Wm. A. F. Stockton, Brevet Major, April 9, 1865.
    First Lieut. Alexander Sweeney, Brevet Captain, March 13, 1865.
    First Serg't. Benjamin F. Powelson, First Lieutenant Co. G. 31st
        U.S.C.T., Sept. 27, 1864.
    Thomas L. Noble, Quartermaster Sergeant of the Regiment, Nov. 28,
        1862.
    John A. McCalmont, 3rd Corporal, vacancy caused by death of
        Donaldson, Feb. 14, 1863.
    Joseph Smith Graham, 2nd Corporal, vacancy caused by discharge
        of McCabe, Feb. 23, 1863.
    David McC. Pry, 6th Corporal, vacancy caused by death of Wm. L.
        Pry, May 12, 1863.
    Corporal Wm. R. H. Powelson, 4th Sergeant, vacancy caused by
        death of T. C. Hayes, July 2, 1863.
    James K. P. Magill, 4th Corporal, vacancy caused by promotion of
        Will Powelson, July 2, 1863.
    William Porter, 7th Corporal, vacancy caused by transfer of
        John F. Gardner, Dec. 17, 1863.
    James K. McCurdy, Assistant Surgeon, 153rd Regt., P.V., Feb. 26,
        1864.
    Corporal Joseph S. Graham, 5th Serg't., vacancy caused by death
        of Shindle, March 1864.
    James C. Lyle, 2nd Corporal; vacancy caused by promotion of
        Graham, March 17, 1864.
    James L. Noah, Sergeant in Battery Independent Pa. Artillery,
        Spring of 1864.
    Corporal George Ralston, First Sergeant, vacancy caused by
        promotion of B. F. Powelson, Sept. 27, 1864.
    George A. Hanlin, 5th Corporal, vacancy caused by promotion of
        Ralston, Sept. 27, 1864.
    Ezra Conway, Wagonmaster Wagon Train, latter part of 1864.
    Musician Jesse J. Morris, Drum Major and on Regimental
        non-commissioned staff, Dec. 22, 1864.
    Marshall Wright, 6th Corporal, vacancy caused by transfer of
        Dave Pry, Feb. 6, 1865.
    Corporal John A. McCalmont, 5th Sergeant, vacancy caused by death
        of Graham, March 25, 1865.
    Abram Andrews, 3rd Corporal, vacancy caused by promotion of
        McCalmont, March 25, 1865.


This made the officers at close of war to be:

Stockton, Captain; Sweeney, First Lieutenant; Cook, Second Lieutenant;
Ralston, First Sergeant; Boyd, Second Sergeant; Alexander, Third
Sergeant; Will Powelson, Fourth Sergeant; McCalmont, Fifth Sergeant;
and the eight Corporals in their order: 1, Cooke; 2, J. C. Lyle; 3,
Abram Andrews; 4, Magill; 5, George Hanlin; 6, Wright; 7, Porter; 8,
Wm. Hanlin.

NOTE.--So far as my memory serves me and the information given me
goes, Comrades Berryhill, Geary, Magill, Porter and Wm. Scott were
practically with the Company in all the leading battles and were never
wounded. Comrades Johnson and Wilkin can have about the same said of
them, save that they received slight wounds. And Comrades Allison and
McCalmont missed the Deep Bottom and Ream's Station engagements.

NOTE.--Mr. Amos Sprowls, of Liberty, Neb., a brother of Comrade Geo.
Sprowls, wrote in answer to inquiry concerning George that he was
wounded and made prisoner at Spottsylvania, May 12, 1864, kept in
hospital at Richmond two months; thence sent to Andersonville prison;
thence, owing to Sherman's march to the sea, sent to North Carolina;
thence, at close of war, sent to Fortress Monroe to be conveyed by
ship to Annapolis, Md. Three transports were loaded; and one of these,
the "Governor," encountered a storm on Chesapeake Bay and sank with
1,600 souls. Sprowls was among them, as he was never heard of
afterwards. A Mr. W. S. Crafto, living near Washington, Pa., reported
seeing him on his way to Fortress Monroe.


Supplementary Statement.

Since forwarding the manuscript for publication, one of our number has
been summoned from service on earth. He has gone to rest. The taps have
been sounded. George A. Hanlin died suddenly from heart disease, Jan.
27, 1906, 2:45 p.m., in his place of business, Clifton street and West
38th avenue, Denver, Colo. He lacked 27 days of being 62 years of age.
The funeral services were largely attended, being conducted Jan. 30th,
10:30 a.m., in the undertaker's parlors and at the grave. The Crocker
G.A.R. Post, Denver, of which he was a member, and the Camp of the
Sons of Veterans, to which his sons belonged, were in attendance; and
he was buried in the full honors of these orders in Fairmount cemetery.
The writer delivered a short address, a tribute to the memory of a
faithful soldier, an upright citizen, a true husband and father, an
industrious and successful business man, and one beloved by all.




Conclusion.


Comrades of Company K, a feeling of sadness steals over me, as now I am
about to lay down my pen. About two years ago, upon your urgent
request, yet with great reluctance, I undertook this work. During these
two years four of our number have fallen out of ranks, never more to
answer to roll call here. How forcibly this reminds us that we are all
hastening to the last earthly roll call! By and by, and "soon 'twill
be," the last one of us must fail to answer. It behooves us to be true
and faithful to the end--to ever live and act that in the Grand Army
above, through Jesus Christ our victorious leader, we may have
comradeship unbroken and of ever increasing delight.

And now, Comrades, I have exhausted my resources in endeavor to serve
you in this work of placing in historic record your deeds of heroism
and works of patriotic sacrifice in the War of the Rebellion. Possibly
I have been too plain, conservative and modest in the language used.
But my heart's desire in it all has been to be faithful and true to
you--to each and all of you. If I had not been one of you, I might have
indulged in superlatives often. Of one thing rest assured, the verdict
of the reader will be, "Nothing is overstated."

I feel that I have imperfectly sketched your part in the saving of the
nation. Your children and theirs to the remotest time will ever be
proud of it. We can ever emphasize one battle, in which as a Company we
had our largest experience; and in which we registered our first and
greatest loss in "killed in action." It was the decisive battle of that
greatest of civil conflicts--"rebellion rising to its supremest effort
and falling fatally wounded." Yes, we can ever point with pride to our
"trial in the fire" at Gettysburg. And we can glory, too, in the
magnificent victory won by the 2nd Corps at Spottsylvania. Certainly
we cannot be charged with undue boasting if we do glory in such
expressions as "brave old Co. K!" "The fighting 140th Regiment P.V.!"
"The old reliable 2nd Corps!"

We together followed the flag of our country in march and battle for
almost three years in the Army of the Potomac, till "old glory" was
triumphant. And we certainly share in the honor a grateful nation
accords to its defenders. And, surviving comrades, in loving
remembrances of our dead, with our hearts full of gratitude and praise,
we do feel proud of what we did, inasmuch, while the years have come
and gone since we laid down our arms and again took our places as
citizens, we have seen our beloved country, more precious in the
immense cost of its preservation, rise to an unparalleled degree of
success and prosperity. And while we rejoice in this, let us, in taking
leave of each other, in the end of this book of history, pledge
ourselves and our posterity to continued faithfulness, to unflinching
devotion to our nation, even unto death.




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber's note:

Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note.

Irregularities and inconsistencies in the text have been retained
as printed.

One paragraph on page 24 contains both duplicated and missing text. As
printed, the text reads:

  ... comforts, etc., and some essentials were lost. The fact is, when
  we were up in support battery on the 3rd, our knapsacks left by
  order, at trenches, were ransacked by camp followers. fact is, when
  we were up in support of battery on the 3rd, our knap- Wheeler, in
  arm; McCalmont, in foot; Briggs, in back; Chester, in leg; and J. W.
  Nickeson, thumb shot off. Corp'l W. L. Pry, in falling back to
  hospital, overcome with fatigue, accidentally shot himself in hand.

An online search revealed one copy of the book with the following hand
written correction:

  ... comforts, etc., and some essentials were lost. The fact is, when
  we were up in support battery on the 3rd, our knapsacks left by
  order, at trenches, were ransacked by camp followers. The company
  had only a few slightly wounded. These were: Wheeler, in arm;
  McCalmont, in foot; Briggs, in back; Chester, in leg; and J. W.
  Nickeson, thumb shot off. Corp'l W. L. Pry, in falling back to
  hospital, overcome with fatigue, accidentally shot himself in hand.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF COMPANY K OF THE 140TH
REGIMENT PENNSYLVANIA VOLUNTEERS (1862-'65)***


******* This file should be named 45626.txt or 45626.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/5/6/2/45626



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
