The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Little Change, by Sydney Grundy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Little Change
       A Farce in One Scene

Author: Sydney Grundy

Release Date: June 20, 2014 [EBook #46044]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LITTLE CHANGE ***




Produced by Paul Haxo with special thanks to Jarndyce
Antiquarian Booksellers.





A LITTLE CHANGE.
A Farce.
IN ONE SCENE.

BY
SYDNEY GRUNDY.


London:           |  New York:
SAMUEL FRENCH,    |  SAMUEL FRENCH & SON,
Publisher,        |  Publishers,
89, STRAND.       |  28, WEST 23rd STREET.



A LITTLE CHANGE.

Characters.
EDWIN
CAPTAIN PLUNGER
ETHEL
MRS. PLUNGER
WAITER

TIME:--_Present._

SCENE.
AT DUMPINGTON.

*_Applications respecting the Performance of this Piece must be made
to Mr. GRUNDY, 4, St. James's Square, Manchester, or to the Publisher._



A LITTLE CHANGE.

----------

SCENE.--_A Room in a Hotel, with windows in the flat, opening upon a
balcony, and overlooking the sea; doors R. and L._

_EDWIN, with a newspaper, yawning and stretching, ETHEL gazing at
him._

ETHEL. Edwin!

EDWIN. Yes, my dear. (_yawns_)

ETHEL. Edwin!

EDWIN. What's the matter?

ETHEL. That's the fifteenth time you've yawned since we've been
married.

EDWIN. Do you say so? Only fifteen yawns, and we've been married----

ETHEL. Ten days, three and twenty hours, and sixteen minutes. Does it
seem that long?

EDWIN. My darling, seem that long! How can you ask such questions? I
should think it doesn't. I declare, it only seems about three weeks!

ETHEL. Three weeks!

EDWIN. No, no! Did I say three weeks? I beg your pardon, I meant days.

ETHEL. I don't believe you did!

EDWIN. O yes, my dear, indeed I meant to say days.

ETHEL. You're not tired of me already, are you?

EDWIN. My dear Ethel, that's the twenty-second time you've asked me
whether I'm not tired of you.

ETHEL. Well, you're not, are you?

EDWIN. I'm not tired of you, my darling, but I'm getting very tired of
saying so, and I'm most tired of all of this confounded neighbourhood.

ETHEL. Oh, Edwin, it's the most delightful place I ever saw! Why,
everybody says the scenery about here is the very scenery to pass
through.

EDWIN. I am quite of their opinion. It is certainly not scenery to
stop in.

ETHEL. And the chambermaid was telling me this morning how delighted
everybody was who went away.

EDWIN. I can completely sympathise with them; I'm sure I shall be
charmed when _I_ go.

ETHEL. Why, what would you have? There are the loveliest sunsets.

EDWIN. Now, that's just what I object to. I don't like the suns about
here; these blazing agricultural suns make such a fuss about retiring
for the night. They're not content unless they've everybody looking at
'em. Now, a respectable manufacturing sun gets behind a good thick
cloud when it goes to bed; and I must say I think that's much more
reputable.

ETHEL. Then the moons. You must confess the moons here are the
loveliest imaginable.

EDWIN. Then, that stupid old moon. Now, can anything be more absurd
than standing on a balcony and staring at the same old moon night
after night?

ETHEL. Edwin, how can you talk about the same old moon, when there's a
new one every month?

EDWIN. A pretty swindle that is, too! A new one every month. That's
just as like the one that went before it, as the one that'll come
after it. I like a little change.

ETHEL. You didn't cut the moon up that way once. You used to look at
it for hours. You were quite smitten with it then.

EDWIN. I freely grant that if I stood and gazed at it for hours, I
must have been considerably struck by it.

ETHEL. Oh, Edwin dear, don't you remember that night in particular----

EDWIN. Do I remember that night? Oh, Ethel, shall I ever forget that
night--that night when--by the by, my dear, which night were you
alluding to?

ETHEL. I said that one in particular.

EDWIN. Precisely so, my love, but then there were so many ones in
particular, and all are so indelibly impressed upon my memory, I can't
remember one of them.

ETHEL. I can remember all of them. Your saying that you'd rather have
me than all the world.

EDWIN. Did I say that?

ETHEL. Twice over: for I asked you if you were quite sure.

EDWIN. And I replied----

ETHEL. As sure as you were you.

EDWIN. Then I don't think the observation goes for much; since, if I
made so foolish a remark, I certainly was not myself.

ETHEL. Then wouldn't you give all the world for me?

EDWIN. I should be very silly if I did, for if I had the world to
give, I should have you to start with. See?

ETHEL. (_with reluctance_) Yes.

EDWIN. You quite see?

ETHEL. Yes--but you would give all the world for me, for all that,
wouldn't you? At least you'd rather have me than any other two people
put together?

EDWIN. Certainly, my dear. I don't much care for freaks of nature of
that sort.

ETHEL. And you've got me, haven't you?

EDWIN. Yes, and you've got me.

ETHEL. And you're very happy, aren't you?

EDWIN. Oh yes.

ETHEL. You're in Paradise?

EDWIN. Exactly so.

ETHEL. And so am I.

EDWIN. Do you like it?

ETHEL. Well, of course I do. Don't you?

EDWIN. Oh yes! I like it very much; but then, you know I like a little
change. I think a little Paradise is very nice indeed, but don't you
think that one may have more Paradise than's good for one? I can't
help thinking it's a great mistake to take one's Paradise neat. Now
we've been taking ours uncommon neat. Just think, the hours we've been
cooped up in that confounded private room upstairs.

ETHEL. Well, Edwin dear, you said you could not stand us being the
only people there, so we've come down into the public room.

EDWIN. And now we _have_ come, we're the only people here. I never
knew such a disgusting place. Now, if we'd had a little change----

ETHEL. You might have met that odious Miss Carruthers, I suppose you
mean--the girl that threw you over.

EDWIN. Miss Carruthers is not odious, my dear, and Miss Carruthers
didn't throw me over. Miss Carruthers was uncommonly fond of me.

ETHEL. Why didn't she have you, then?

EDWIN. Because she didn't get the chance. My only apprehension is lest
I threw Miss Carruthers over.

ETHEL. If you did, she must have tumbled on her nose, for I am sure
it's broken.

EDWIN. No, my dear, it's you who are responsible for anything that
there may be to do with Miss Carruthers' nose, for it was you who put
it out. But nothing is the matter with it. It's a lovely
nose--especially the end of it.

ETHEL. Her eyes appear to think so, for they're always looking there.
But that may be, because it is the only object they can look at both
together.

EDWIN. You don't mean to say she squints!

ETHEL. Abominably.

EDWIN. Nothing of the sort.

ETHEL. I never saw such eyes!

EDWIN. Well, well, whatever they may be, she hasn't made them.

ETHEL. But she has, repeatedly--at you. And that's what I object to.
If folks do squint, they can't help it, but if folks who squint go on
as if they didn't squint, why they deserve to have their eyes flung in
their teeth.

EDWIN. Now, why bring teeth into the question? What have Miss
Carruthers' teeth done that they should be flung at?

ETHEL. What they've done I'm sure I don't know, but I should imagine a
good deal. They look as if they'd seen hard service.

EDWIN. You compare them to a regiment of soldiers.

ETHEL. Excuse me: to a regiment of volunteers: I should never have
dreamt of comparing them to anything regular.

EDWIN. Oh, nonsense, they're a string of pearls.

ETHEL. Yes, pearls that have gone yellow.

EDWIN. Anyhow, you must admit, she has a very amiable mouth.

ETHEL. I don't think that her mouth is amiable at all, or it would
cover up her teeth more.

EDWIN. Well, what feature are you going to enlarge on next? Her ears?

ETHEL. I'm sure her ears don't want enlarging on; they're big enough
already.

EDWIN. Now there's only her hair left. Abuse her hair.

ETHEL. Oh, no, my love, she's not responsible for that. It's not her
own.

EDWIN. If she were only here now!

ETHEL. But she's not; and what's more you're not going to where she
is.

EDWIN. I don't care where I go, so long as I leave this place.

ETHEL. But you won't leave this place. We stop here a month.

EDWIN. Ethel!

ETHEL. A month.

EDWIN. A week!

ETHEL. A month.

EDWIN. A fortnight!

ETHEL. A month.

EDWIN. There's not a soul here.

ETHEL. Well, what of it? You're a married man.

EDWIN. Alas!

ETHEL. And you've no business carrying on with Miss Carruthers, and
Miss Carruthers has no business carrying on with you.

EDWIN. But she doesn't know I'm married. Ha, ha, ha!

ETHEL. She must have seen it in the papers.

EDWIN. But I didn't put it in the papers.

ETHEL. You don't mean to say you haven't put our marriage in the
papers!

EDWIN. Not in one of them, my dear. I daren't. That girl had so made
up her mind that I was going to propose to her, that the announcement
of our marriage would have given her fits.

ETHEL. And so it isn't in the papers! Oh! it isn't half being married,
when it isn't in the papers! We stop here for two months.

EDWIN. We leave here to-morrow. (_at the window_) Ethel! Ethel! I
distinctly see a woman. Positively--yes, a woman has arrived. She
turns this way. She looks--she smiles--she bows. By jingo, Miss
Carruthers! Ha, ha, ha, ha!

ETHEL. No! (_runs to window_) It _is_ her! We leave here to-morrow.

EDWIN. (_sitting down firmly_) We stop here for two months.

ETHEL. Oh! (_jumps up to window_) Well, I declare. Well, did I ever?
This is charming. (_to some one without_) How d' you do? How are you?
Quite well, thank you; so glad that you've come. Oh, Edwin, if there's
not that dear delightful Captain Plunger.

EDWIN. Eh?

ETHEL. You know. That darling Captain Plunger.

EDWIN. You don't mean that--that infernal fellow with the whiskers,
whom I've been so nearly kicking several times.

ETHEL. That very man. My favourite admirer.

EDWIN. Ethel, you're a married woman.

ETHEL. But he doesn't know it, dear. He can't.

EDWIN. Why not?

ETHEL. Because it wasn't in the paper, love. Ha, ha, ha, ha! Ta, ta.
I'm going to put another dress on, and some more hair, and to go on
just as if I wasn't married, dear. He doesn't know I am, because it
wasn't in the papers. Ha, ha, ha, ha! Not in one of them! Ha, ha, ha,
ha, ha, ha!

_Exit, R._

EDWIN. I've made a horrible mistake. I ought to have pretended that it
_was_ put in the papers, every one of them, except the ones that can
be got at Dumpington. A pretty mess my candour's got me into. This is
the consequence of telling one's wife the truth. But who'd have
thought that fellow with the whiskers would turn up? I did think that
at last I'd given him the slip. He dogs me everywhere. I never could
get half a dozen words with either Ethel or that Miss Carruthers, but
he put his whiskers in between us, and it was all up with me. What
chance has intellect with whiskers? I shall have to give the local
barber half a sovereign to clip one off by accident. Meanwhile, the
first thing I must do, must be to let him know that Ethel's married.
Oh, no, hang it, the first thing he'd do, would be to tell the tale to
Miss Carruthers. I must be a bachelor again; there's no help for it.
It'll at any rate be a relief to the monotony of Dumpington. On even
terms I'd fight it out with pleasure, but I'm overweighted. Nature is
_not_ fair. She doesn't divide the whiskers properly.

_Enter MRS. PLUNGER, R., advancing quickly to him._

MRS. P. Oh, Mr. Larkspur, how d'you do? You can't think how rejoiced I
was to see you at the window just now; Dumpington is so extremely dull
without society.

EDWIN. It is indeed. I'm sure I was entranced when I saw you. I was
quite longing for a little change.

MRS. P. Have you been here some time?

EDWIN. Ten days--and I have seen about as many people. (_they sit_)

MRS. P. I suppose it's not the season just now.

EDWIN. I supposed so, too, until my first week's bill came in, when I
discovered that the season was exactly at its height--at least, the
charges were at theirs.

MRS. P. What in the world induced you to come here?

EDWIN. I wasn't induced to come here. I was brought.

MRS. P. Indeed. Who brought you?

EDWIN. Mrs. Larkspur.

MRS. P. Mrs. Larkspur!

EDWIN. (_aside_) Oh dear me, what _have_ I said? Yes, I was brought
here by--my mother.

MRS. P. Oh, your mother. Then, your mother's here?

EDWIN. Yes, she was recommended the sea air.

MRS. P. She's not well?

EDWIN. No, she's not very well. In fact she's so ill that she has to
keep her room.

MRS. P. Oh dear, I'm sorry to hear that. I fear, then, I shan't see
her.

EDWIN. I'm afraid you won't--(_aside_) considering she's been dead
this twenty years.

MRS. P. But you're not quite alone here, I perceive. I met Miss
Darlington upon the stairs.

EDWIN. Yes, she is staying here.

MRS. P. Upon the look out for a husband, I suppose. How very plain
she's grown!

EDWIN. Plain?

MRS. P. Don't you think so?

EDWIN. Well, perhaps she isn't quite so pretty as she used to be.

MRS. P. Pretty? She never was that. She once had a passable figure.

EDWIN. An exquisite figure.

MRS. P. Do you think so? What extraordinary taste you men have!
Anyhow, she's gone off.

EDWIN. (_jumping up_) Gone off! What, with Captain Plunger?

MRS. P. Ha, ha, ha! You didn't think he'd run away with her? I meant,
gone off in looks.

EDWIN. Oh. (_drops again into a chair_)

MRS. P. By the way, the captain _is_ here: came by the same train as
we did: and we all know how she's angled for him.

EDWIN. I don't though, I'm sure.

MRS. P. You don't know how Miss Darlington has angled after Captain
Plunger? Why, where ever have you been this five years? It's the talk
of the whole regiment. So that there was some reason for your
exclamation, though not much; for any one at all acquainted with the
parties would be quite sure Captain Plunger wouldn't run away with
Ethel Darlington.

EDWIN. Why not?

MRS. P. Oh! Captain Plunger is a man of taste. He couldn't possibly
put up with any girl of that sort.

EDWIN. What sort?

MRS. P. Why, the sort of girl who is so very indiscriminate in the
attention she receives. He has too great a scorn for such a character.

EDWIN. And yet I think at the Artillery Ball I saw him putting up with
Ethel Darlington to the extent of half-a-dozen dances in succession.
He contrives to hide his scorn uncommonly.

MRS. P. He would do. Captain Plunger is a perfect gentleman. He'd
flirt with her, no doubt.

EDWIN. I've seen him.

MRS. P. He might even get engaged to her.

EDWIN. Indeed!

MRS. P. But he would never marry such a girl.

EDWIN. Although he'd get engaged to her?

MRS. P. Oh dear, no! Captain Plunger is a man of fine morality.

EDWIN. I always thought he was that sort of man.

MRS. P. The more one sees of him, the more one likes him. (_rising_)

EDWIN. Really! Then, seeing him must have the opposite effect to
hearing of him, for the more I hear of him the more I feel inclined to
kick him. (_rising_)

MRS. P. You don't like him?

EDWIN. I detest him!

MRS. P. Oh, you jealous man! You're envious of his success amongst the
ladies.

EDWIN. I should like to cut his whiskers off.

MRS. P. And so shear Samson of his strength.

EDWIN. However, I won't vent my malice upon you; I must point out the
beauties of the neighbourhood. It won't take long.

MRS. P. We'd better go outside to see them, hadn't we?

EDWIN. I think you'll see enough of them from where you stand. Now,
are you looking?

MRS. P. Yes.

EDWIN. Up there's the sky.

MRS. P. Well, I've seen that before.

EDWIN. Oh, if you think that you'll see anything in Dumpington you
haven't seen before, why, you'll be disappointed.

MRS. P. Well, what next?

EDWIN. Down there's the sand.

MRS. P. Yes, don't they call it something else? Not sand, but
something like it.

EDWIN. Strand?

MRS. P. Strand! that's it.

EDWIN. Yes, some people call it strand. The grocers call it sugar.

MRS. P. How very playful of them! Well, go on, and tell me the next beauty.

EDWIN. Over there's the sun.

MRS. P. But I can't look at that, because of my complexion.

EDWIN. Oh! I'm sorry you can't look at that, because it's the last
beauty of Dumpington.

MRS. P. Is that all?

EDWIN. That's all.

MRS. P. Good gracious, how do people pass their time here?

EDWIN. In the morning, they sit and look at the sun. In the evening,
they sit and look at the moon. Oh dear, I quite forgot--occasionally
you can see the sea.

MRS. P. The sea!

EDWIN. Sometimes--through a strong telescope.

MRS. P. You goose, it's there.

EDWIN. Why so it is, the tide has actually arrived. For the first time
in the ten days that I have been at Dumpington the tide is coming in.
It's always been going out before. Hush! Hark!

MRS. P. What to?

EDWIN. The music of the spheres. (_a German band strikes up outside_)

BOTH. Oh law!

_Exeunt arm-in-arm through window, to stop band._

_Enter CAPTAIN PLUNGER, led by WAITER, L_.

WAITER. This is the public room, sir.

CAPT. Oh, good gracious, do send some one out to stop that very brassy
band. (_it stops_)

WAITER. The band, sir? Oh, that's nothing. You should hear the Christy
Minstrels--them as never play in London, sir--the two men with the
harp and fiddle, the blind man with the accordion, the woman with the
tambourine, the lad with the tin whistle, the three foreign girls with
the two banjoes and a drum, the Punch and Judy Show, the bagpipes, and
the barrel-organs With the monkeys, all agoing at once. It makes it
very lively, sir.

CAPT. Yes, deadly lively.

WAITER. Dumpington is very musical.

CAPT. Then, Dumpington is very different from its musicians.

WAITER. It's the children what they play to, sir. We've a large family
on the ground floor just recovering from the measles, a small family
on the floor above as have just had the whooping cough--oh, in the
night, sir, they whoops awful--and a middling family in the next room
what's just halfway through the scarlet fever; and a very nice attack
they're having.

CAPT. Heaven preserve us! then is Dumpington a hospital?

WAITER. A hospital? I don't know about that, sir. The Montpelier of
the North, they calls it.

CAPT. Who does?

WAITER. Well, the railway companies.

CAPT. How d' you get down to the sea?

WAITER. You go along the pier, sir.

CAPT. Oh, you walk along the pier.

WAITER. Not many people walk, sir--it's a mile long. Trains start
every fifteen minutes.

CAPT. That's if anybody wants to go?

WAITER. Precisely so, sir; but as no one ever does want, they don't
start at all, sir.

CAPT. What the dickens do the people do then?

WAITER. Well, they're mostly wheeled about in Bath chairs.

CAPT. Oh, preserve us! Where is Mrs. Plunger?

WAITER. Went out on the balcony as we came in, sir--with a gentleman.

CAPT. A gentleman! Did she seem to know him?

WAITER. Very much, sir.

CAPT. You can go. I'll join them.

WAITER. Beg your pardon, sir, but I don't think they want you to.

CAPT. Go to the--kitchen, fellow!

_Exit WAITER, L_.

Upon my word, my wife has lost no time in finding a companion. I don't
think that I can pay her a more fitting compliment than that of
following her example. It's a lucky thing for Dumpington I saw Miss
Darlington just now, or I'd have gone by the first train that starts
for anywhere. I wonder if she knows I'm married? Let us hope the
London papers don't reach here. (_sees paper_) What's this? The
"Dumpington Gazette." It's not in that. (_sits down and reads_)
"Salubrity of Dumpington. The slanderous assertion that this
fashionable watering place, the annual rendezvous of such a galaxy of
rank and beauty, is infected with an epidemic, is the baseless calumny
of venomous malignity. The only fifteen cases in the neighbourhood are
yielding rapidly to the invigorating influence of our sea air, and the
unflagging energy and skill of Dr. Mumps, the able and experienced
practitioner, who advertises weekly in the 'Dumpington Gazette.'"

_Meanwhile ETHEL has re-entered, R., and sat beside him._

ETHEL. Do you find the paper very interesting?

CAPT. (_jumping up_) Miss Darlington! I beg ten thousand pardons for
not seeing you before. This is indeed a happy meeting. I was reading
in the paper that a galaxy of rank and beauty was at Dumpington, and I
was wondering where the beauty was, unconscious that it was so near
me.

ETHEL. Very near indeed, for Miss Carruthers is at this hotel.

CAPT. I beg your pardon, who is?

ETHEL. Miss Carruthers.

CAPT. What, is Miss Carruthers Miss Carruthers still?

ETHEL. Oh, dear me, yes.

CAPT. (_aside_) Hurrah! She doesn't know I'm married. "Sound the loud
timbrel o'er Egypt's----" (_a tambourine strikes up outside_) Oh,
dear!

ETHEL. There's that eternal woman with the tambourine; do send her
away, please!

CAPT. (_runs to window_) There, that'll do; we've got no coppers.
(_coming back_) You were saying----

ETHEL. I was saying that Miss Carruthers is still Miss Carruthers, and
is likely to remain so. That is, if men really have the taste that
they pretend to.

CAPT. Do you really think so? Oh, I don't know, she's a dashing girl.

ETHEL. I don't like dashing girls.

CAPT. Well, when I say a dashing girl, I mean she's undeniably
accomplished.

ETHEL. I have heard she paints!

CAPT. Ah, you don't care for her. Well, I admit, she is a little
difficult to understand.

ETHEL. Oh, dear me, no! I call her very plain.

CAPT. And yet she is considered beautiful by some.

ETHEL. I only know one person who considers so, and that's herself.

CAPT. Oh, but I know another.

ETHEL. Do you? What's the curious creature's name?

CAPT. His name----

ETHEL. _His_ name. I thought it was a man. Well, what's his name?

CAPT. His name is Larkspur.

ETHEL. Larkspur!

CAPT. Larkspur.

ETHEL. It's my turn to beg your pardon now. You're very much mistaken.
Mr. Larkspur doesn't care for her at all.

CAPT. Indeed; I wonder what possessed him to propose to her.

ETHEL. Propose to her!

CAPT. Yes, don't you know that he's proposed to her?

ETHEL. I don't believe it--not a word of it!

CAPT. I have it on the very best authority.

ETHEL. On whose?

CAPT. On Miss Carruthers' own.

ETHEL. Oh! Miss Carruthers' own! ha, ha, ha! Captain Plunger, now I
should have thought with your experience of the world you would have
known that upon such a subject Miss Carruthers' was the very worst
authority you could possibly have.

CAPT. I'm sure she hinted that he had proposed to her.

ETHEL. That I can quite believe. But she is labouring under a mistake.
The wish was husband to the thought.

CAPT. I think the probabilities are in her favour. Mr. Larkspur is the
sort of man who would propose to her, and it would only be one more
rejection added to the quantity he has already suffered.

ETHEL. What, has Mr. Larkspur then proposed to someone else?

CAPT. They say, he never sees a girl three times without proposing to
her.

ETHEL. And he's always unsuccessful?

CAPT. Well, I did hear a vague rumour that some girl or other had at
last had pity on him,--but by Jove, she must have been hard up.

ETHEL. Indeed! He must have been astonished at his sudden change of
fortune.

CAPT. Quite knocked over. So I heard. He'd got so used to being
rejected, that he felt quite disappointed when he was accepted. And
between us two----

ETHEL. Yes.

CAPT. I shouldn't like his wife to hear it--but between us two, he
told a friend of mine that if he'd thought she'd have accepted him,
he'd never have proposed to her.

ETHEL. Did he? How very amusing!

CAPT. Oh, extremely entertaining. It'd be a very good joke to tell his
wife.

ETHEL. I wouldn't do that. It is a very good joke, but perhaps she
mightn't see it.

CAPT. Perhaps not: wives are very dull. But he's a rum fish. Everybody
cuts his joke at him. Indeed, he's got so laughed at that he's started
for Australia.

ETHEL. Do you say so?

CAPT. At Southampton now.

ETHEL. He's at Southampton?

CAPT. So my friend says.

ETHEL. I'm afraid your friend is not to be implicitly relied upon, for
Mr. Larkspur happens to be here.

CAPT. In Dumpington?

ETHEL. At this hotel.

CAPT. Then, that's the man who's flirting with my--that is, Miss
Carruthers.

ETHEL. Where?

CAPT. Upon the balcony.

ETHEL. Is Mr. Larkspur on the balcony with Miss Carruthers? (_runs to
window_)

CAPT. I have reason to believe so.

ETHEL. So he is. Oh, very well. (_returns_) Shall _we_ go out upon the
balcony?

CAPT. The waiter said he thought they didn't want to be interrupted.

ETHEL. Don't they? That's the very reason, then, why we should
interrupt them. Would you kindly let me take your arm?

CAPT. With pleasure.

ETHEL. Won't it be delightful?

CAPT. Oh, enchanting! To recline against the balustrade, and listen to
the sighing of the sad sea waves. (_barrel organ starts outside_)

ETHEL. Oh, there's that dreadful barrel organ. Please do stop it.

CAPT. (_runs to window_) There, there, my good fellow. He won't stop.
My good man, please--It's no go. Stop that row, you noisy vagabond! He
_won't_ stop.

ETHEL. Oh, I'd give him something. He won't go unless you do.

CAPT. You'll give him something, did you say?

ETHEL. I said, I would, if I were you.

CAPT. Oh, just so. Look here, you! I'll give you--(_organ
stops_)--into custody! (_organ begins again_) How much? He says it's
sixpence if he plays and eighteen-pence to go away.

ETHEL. Well, give him eighteen-pence.

CAPT. You'll give him eighteen-pence?

ETHEL. He would not care for me. You'd better give it him.

CAPT. Oh, certainly. (_pulls money out_) Dear me, I haven't got a
sixpence.

ETHEL. Haven't you? I daresay he wouldn't mind two shillings.

CAPT. (_aside_) This is deucedly expensive. (_throws a coin_) There,
you scoundrel! (_organ stops_) And now, might I have the pleasure?
(_offering arm_)

ETHEL. (_taking it_) Would you take my fan?

CAPT. I shall be charmed. These English beggars have such barbarous
instruments. (_the bagpipes start_).

ETHEL. There that's the Scotchman. He's the worst of all. Pray do get
rid of him. The bagpipes always make we ill.

CAPT. (_again at window_) My dear good fellow--you infernal rascal,
stop that hideous din!

ETHEL. Oh, send him off--do send him off. I'm going to be so ill.

CAPT. Hi! How much will you go away for? What? He says he never goes
away for less than half-a-crown.

ETHEL. He doesn't. The bagpipes never do. They know that they can get
the money. Give it him.

CAPT. (_aside_) I shall be ruined. (_throws another coin_) There! Be
off! (_they cease_) Now, shall we go?

ETHEL. Would you relieve me of my shawl?

CAPT. Delighted, I am sure. (_they move slowly towards the window, R.,
arm in arm, he bowing down to her, she smiling up at him_)

_Re-enter EDWIN through L. window._

EDWIN. I'm getting on tremendously with Miss Carruthers. This is great
fun; I do like a little change. Now, if Ethel wasn't so absurdly fond
of me--if she would only flirt a bit--(_perceiving her_) Holloa! It
strikes me she is flirting a bit. (_BOY outside has just commenced to
sing_)

ETHEL. Oh, really, Captain Plunger!

BOY. (_singing_) "And the captain with his whiskers stole a sly glance
at me."

EDWIN. Oh, come, I say, you know. It strikes me Ethel's flirting a
good deal. It seems _she_ likes a little change. This isn't such great
fun after all.

ETHEL. I hope that no one will disturb us.

CAPT. I'd advise them not.

_Exeunt through R. window._

EDWIN. (_who has come round gradually, R._) Oh, hang it, I'll go after
them. This isn't fun at all.

_Exit through same window._

_Re-enter MRS. PLUNGER through L. window._

MRS. P. Where's Mr. Larkspur got to I should like to know? I'm not
going to be left in this way, I can tell him.

_Re-enter ETHEL, through L. window._

ETHEL. There they both are. Won't there be a row?

MRS. P. My dearest Ethel!

ETHEL. Oh my darling Alice! (_they embrace_)

MRS. P. I've been having such fun.

ETHEL. So have I.

MRS. P. I'm in the middle of a desperate flirtation.

ETHEL. That's exactly what I'm coming to myself.

MRS. P. Ah, but my dear, you don't know what flirtation is. Wait till
you're married. Then's the time.

ETHEL. But _you're_ not married?

MRS. P. I'm not married! Why, my dear, where have you been this age? I
made sure everybody knew that I was married this day week.

ETHEL. I've no doubt you endeavoured to let everybody know, my love;
but being away upon my honeymoon, I didn't hear of it.

MRS. P. What are _you_ married too?

ETHEL. Good gracious! You didn't know that I was married ten days ago!
Where have you been this century?

MRS. P. Then, we've both of us got husbands.

ETHEL. But I got mine first.

MRS. P. Perhaps so. You were always in a hurry to get married.

ETHEL. Was I, love? Then I'd a fault which you had not, for everyone
says you've been long enough about it.

MRS. P. It's quite true I didn't snap at the first offer that was made
to me.

ETHEL. You didn't snap at it, indeed; you were uncommon civil to it.
So polite, in fact, that you accepted it.

MRS. P. The offer that my husband made to me was not the first by any
means.

ETHEL. Then it's true, is it? I had heard that he'd proposed to
several other girls before.

MRS. P. How could you, when you hadn't heard I was married?

ETHEL. But I had heard you were going to be.

MRS. P. Then, why were you astonished when you found I was?

ETHEL. Because, my love, I had dismissed the rumour as incredible.

MRS. P. And who did rumour say had got possession of me?

ETHEL. Rumour didn't say that anyone had got possession of you, dear;
it said that you had got possession of him.

MRS. P. Of whom?

ETHEL. I really couldn't catch his name--they spoke of him as "that
poor fellow."

MRS. P. I don't think that Captain Plunger stands in need of their
commiseration.

ETHEL. Captain Plunger! What, is Captain Plunger married?

MRS. P. Captain Plunger is.

ETHEL. And yet he had the impudence to make me think he wasn't?

MRS. P. Do you mean to say it's Captain Plunger you've been flirting
with?

ETHEL. For all the world as if he was a bachelor! the wretch!

MRS. P. The monster! But I'm even with him; for he can't have flirted
half as hard with you as I have done with Mr. Larkspur.

ETHEL. Mr. Larkspur! Is it Mr. Larkspur you've been flirting with?

MRS. P. Of course it is. He always was a favourite of mine.

ETHEL. But you were not a favourite of his. He doesn't care for you a
bit.

MRS. P. I fear, myself, it's a good deal.

ETHEL. It isn't though, I tell you. He can't bear the sight of you.

MRS. P. I dare say not, my love. It will of course remind him that I
am another's.

ETHEL. But he doesn't care whose you are.

MRS. P. Well, well, you needn't get excited, dear. If you _are_
married, Mr. Larkspur's state of mind is of no consequence to you.

ETHEL. It's just because I'm married that it is of consequence to
me--for I'm his wife.

MRS. P. You Mr. Larkspur's wife? Then Mr. Larkspur's married?

ETHEL. I should think he is.

MRS. P. I am so glad. It was so very painful to suppose that he was
dying for me.

ETHEL. If you have supposed so, you have given yourself a great deal
of superfluous anxiety. He was never better in his life.

MRS. P. I'm very glad to hear it. So he's married you, my dear? I was
afraid, when he perceived I was inflexible, he would do something
rash.

ETHEL. Do you mean to say that he's proposed to you?

MRS. P. I never let him go so far, my pet. But you should see how he
makes love to me.

ETHEL. I will. I'll hide behind the curtains here, like
this--(_retires among the curtains_) and listen with both ears.

MRS. P. Do, darling, and you'll have a pleasant time of it.

_Re-enter EDWIN, through window, L._

You've come back, have you, Mr. Larkspur?

EDWIN. I have come back, Mrs. Plunger.

MRS. P. Oh! You've found out that, I'm married?

EDWIN. And whom to. I must say that I think you might have told me. I
consider that flirtation by a married woman is most reprehensible.

MRS. P. I quite agree with you. I think it almost as abominable as
flirtation by a married man.

EDWIN. Eh?

MRS. P. I congratulate you, Mr. Larkspur.

EDWIN. Then you've heard _I'm_ married? Well I am. I'm married to the
nicest girl in England; but ten days at Dumpington are more than flesh
can stand. I got intolerably tired of its monotony, and for a little
change I thought I would make love to you.

MRS. P. What, for a little change!

EDWIN. No other reason I assure you. Fortunately, Ethel thought she'd
occupy the time in making love to Captain Plunger. I didn't like her
making love to him, and so I thought she mightn't like my making love
to you, and I'm not going to do it any more. I further beg to state
that Mrs. Larkspur is not on the look out for a husband, that in my
opinion she has not gone off at all, and that I don't believe she ever
angled after anyone.

ETHEL. (_running out_) You dear old darling, you're the greatest love
that is or ever was or ever will be. I don't care for anyone but you.
I only flirted to cure you. I beg your pardon, and I'll never do so
any more; and you'll forgive me, won't you? (_on her knees_)

EDWIN. Ethel, are you on the look-out for a husband?

ETHEL. Edwin, did you never see a girl three times without proposing
to her?

EDWIN. Did you angle after Captain Plunger?

ETHEL. Did you say that if you'd thought I should accept you, you
should never have proposed to me?

EDWIN. I didn't. You've been told a lot of wicked stories. (_raising
her_)

ETHEL. So have you.

MRS. P. What a delightful reconciliation!

EDWIN. Yes, it is delightful, Mrs. Plunger, to discover in one's wife
a woman who's as amiable after marriage as before.

MRS. P. Oh, Ethel always had the reputation of an amiable woman.
People said, when I was quite a child, she was an amiable woman.

ETHEL. (_aside to EDWIN_) Never mind her, she doesn't know that
Captain Plunger first proposed to me.

EDWIN. What, in his whiskers?

ETHEL. Yes.

EDWIN. And you rejected them?

ETHEL. For you!

EDWIN. I've licked the whiskers! Bravo! "See the conquering hero
comes, sound the trumpets, beat the drums!" (_band strikes up again_)
Oh, no, don't, please.

_Re-enter CAPTAIN PLUNGER through R. window._

CAPT. Here's that dreadful band again. The leader says the bagpipes
have told everyone we're pitching out half crowns, and all the music
in the town is on its way here.

MRS. P. Captain Plunger, I am given to understand that you've been
going on with Mrs. Larkspur in a most improper manner.

CAPT. Nothing of the sort, my love. I never flirt--when you are with
me.

EDWIN. If he has, you must forgive him this time, Mrs. Plunger, as my
wife's forgiven me. (_band stops_)

CAPT. What's she forgiven you, Larkspur?

ETHEL. I've forgiven him his going on with Mrs. Plunger.

CAPT. So have I. I don't at all resent his going on with Mrs. Plunger.

MRS. P. Oh, you monster!

CAPT. What I should resent would be his going off with Mrs. Plunger.

MRS. P. I mean, oh, you darling.

_Re-enter WAITER, R._

WAITER. If you please, the family with the measles has sent up to say
as how they can't have all the music turned away. It brings the rash
out beautiful.

EDWIN. All right then. Let them have their fill. It makes no
difference to us, as we leave Dumpington to-morrow.

WAITER. Leave to-morrow, sir! What for?

ETHEL. "A LITTLE CHANGE."

(_a concert of street music outside_)

CURTAIN.




Transcriber's Note

A copy of the images used in this transcription has been posted at:

     archive.org/details/GrundyLittleChange

The following changes were made to the text:

- p. 10: MRS. P. By the way, the captain is here: came by by the same
train--Deleted the second "by".

- p. 13: WAITER, You go along the pier, sir.--Changed comma after
"WAITER" to a period.

- p. 17: CAPT You'll give him eighteen-pence?--Inserted a period after
"CAPT".

- p. 18: _they move slowly towards the window, R, arm in
arm_--Inserted a period after "R".

- p. 19: ETHEL But you're not married?--Inserted a period after
"ETHEL".







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Little Change, by Sydney Grundy

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LITTLE CHANGE ***

***** This file should be named 46044.txt or 46044.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/0/4/46044/

Produced by Paul Haxo with special thanks to Jarndyce
Antiquarian Booksellers.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
