The Project Gutenberg EBook of Yellowstone and Grand Teton National Parks, by
Union Pacific Corporation

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Yellowstone and Grand Teton National Parks

Author: Union Pacific Corporation

Release Date: July 15, 2014 [EBook #46291]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YELLOWSTONE AND GRAND TETON ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, the Mo-Ark Regional Railroad
Museum at Poplar Bluff, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                              YELLOWSTONE
                            AND GRAND TETON
                             NATIONAL PARKS


                         UNION PACIFIC RAILROAD


                 (_Front Cover_) _Old Faithful Geyser_

[Illustration: Animals of the Rocky Mountains]




                          NATURE'S WONDERLAND


Truly, Yellowstone National Park is a wonderland of nature. Poets have
written about it, and artists have painted it, but to believe that such
a scenic region is possible, you must see with your own eyes the
spouting geysers, bubbling cauldrons, giant canyons and other
spectacular phenomena, all of which present a flashing brilliance of
motion and color which you will never forget.

[Illustration: Morning Glory Pool]

Yellowstone is the largest, the oldest and, perhaps, the best known of
America's many national parks. It is at once weird, incredible and
magnificent in its rugged, wild beauty. It is one of the greatest
wild-life sanctuaries in the world.

Frontiersman John Colter discovered the fabulous area by chance in the
winter of 1807-08. Colter had been sent by the celebrated trader, Manuel
Lisa, to Pierre's Hole in eastern Idaho to make friends with the Crow
Indians. Coming home Colter sought a short cut and stumbled upon the
mystery of Yellowstone. When he told his friends of the fantastic land
he had seen, they refused to believe him.

[Illustration: John Colter discovers Yellowstone]

Twenty years later Jim Bridger brought back a report similar to
Colter's, but he, too, was greeted with winks and smiles. Finally,
however, the Washburn-Doane Expedition, headed by H. D. Washburn,
Surveyor-General of Montana, was organized in August 1870, and
accompanied by an army detail, officially investigated the phenomena in
the Park.

They encountered innumerable fascinating wonders that even Colter,
Bridger and other explorers had missed. They were determined that
Yellowstone should be preserved in all its primeval beauty for the
enjoyment of all Americans. Their enthusiasm was boundless. Largely
because of their efforts a bill was passed through Congress on March 1,
1872, and the rugged wilderness was set aside as Yellowstone National
Park.

Since that time millions of travelers have seen the glory that is
Yellowstone's. Thousands return year after year. Still others come only
once, but they consider it the trip of a lifetime.




                              GRAND TETON


A few miles south of Yellowstone is Grand Teton National Park, set aside
by the government in 1929. Grand Teton and the surrounding country have
many distinctive features.

[Illustration: Jackson Lake and the Tetons]

Grand Teton is noted for its mountain grandeur. Many of its jagged,
towering peaks of granite rear their heads upward 10 to 13 thousand or
more feet. In many respects they resemble the famed Alps of Europe.

Lying at the base of these towering spires are lakes of sapphire-blue,
and round about are forests and verdant meadowlands.

Here the visitor feels the tang of the Old West. Central lodges and
sleeping cabins are available. Safe saddle trails reach out in all
directions.

Motorboats and rowboats as well as trusty saddle ponies may be rented at
nominal charges.




                        SEEING YELLOWSTONE PARK


You may see Yellowstone National Park in your own way. Roam the trails
alone, or with an experienced guide, as you prefer. But, by all means,
bring your camera!

Yellowstone is _your_ park! It has been provided with fine roads and
modern hotels so that you may enjoy its wonders in comfort. You are
genuinely welcome to come and stay as long as you like. You could easily
stay all summer and never exhaust the alluring appeal, the charm, and
tonic effect of Yellowstone's beauty. However, if you can stay for only
a limited period, you can still see all the principal points of
interest.

You can live as modestly or as lavishly as your choice dictates. In
traveling about the Park you may select the style of accommodations that
appeals most to you. You can go by Park motor bus with other visitors,
or by yourself in a private automobile. Such automobiles are available
for hire at government-approved rates.

Splendid camping sites may be found in all parts of the Park. At the
main centers of interest are modern hotels, as well as clean,
comfortable cabins. Service and accommodations are excellent and one
cannot help but marvel at such comfort and luxury in the depths of the
wilderness.

[Illustration: Devil's Punch Bowl]

[Illustration: Lower Falls and Yellowstone Canyon]

So that visitors may see as much of the Park as possible, in a limited
amount of time, pre-arranged tours by motor bus are operated. These
tours are especially appreciated by folks who travel by rail to
Yellowstone. The tour consumes just two and one-half days. Leisure stops
are made to properly see all the chief scenic attractions. Another
advantage of selecting a pre-arranged tour is that it eliminates the
anxiety of driving your own car over unfamiliar mountain roads. Without
stress and strain, completely relaxed, you're all the more free to enjoy
Yellowstone's wondrous sights.

[Illustration: Modern Yellowstone bus leaving Old Faithful Inn]

Bus drivers in Yellowstone Park are thoroughly competent and reliable.
Also, Ranger Naturalists of the National Park Service provide many
enlightening bits of information on the formations, the flora and fauna
in their talks and on guided walks.




                       WEST YELLOWSTONE ENTRANCE


The Union Pacific route to Yellowstone National Park takes visitors to
West Yellowstone, Montana, right on the Park border, and the nearest
entrance to Old Faithful Geyser, Yellowstone's most famous attraction.
Here, amid the fragrance of the pine forests, the railroad maintains
West Yellowstone Station, and an attractive dining lodge.

Upon arriving at the station you have a short time for refreshments; a
brief glimpse of the rustic village; mailing cards; buying souvenirs, or
perhaps making a few necessary purchases. Then you're ready to climb
into a comfortable motor bus for the trip to Old Faithful region.

The first day's ride is a preview of the promise that Yellowstone will
fulfill. Along the way you will be constantly amazed by a continuous
series of pulse-quickening sights ... green, virgin forests; National
Park Mountain; glimpses of the Madison River, and charming views of
distant mountains.

Presently the chatter of the cascades of Firehole River is heard. This
is one of Yellowstone's most bewitching waterfalls. Oddly enough, while
the waters are warmed from geysers and hot springs, the river is alive
with trout.




                       FIRST VIEW OF THE GEYSERS


In the Lower Geyser Basin, Yellowstone parts the curtain and stages a
gigantic thermal exhibit. Here the first geysers come into view. There
they are! Dipping and skyrocketing; spears of boiling water belch
upward, dazzling white against the backdrop of blue skies and forest
greenery. For size, number, power and action, no other geysers in the
world compare to those of Yellowstone.

In the west and south-central parts of the Park are six major geyser
basins. Each contains a number of geysers, pools and springs. This
spectacular section of Yellowstone is extremely fascinating. In the
Lower Basin are numerous well-known geysers, but in the Upper Basin
famous Old Faithful probably will attract your first attention.
Moreover, near by is Old Faithful Inn, where you will want to stay for
one or more delightful, pleasure-filled days.

Park Ranger Naturalists have prepared an interesting display at Old
Faithful which reveals the intricate operation of geysers. An artificial
miniature geyser has been constructed and its working parts may be seen
and understood. In reality a geyser is a hot spring that has developed
into a fountain. A plume of water shoots upward at nearly boiling
temperature. The hot volcanic rocks beneath the earth create steam and
give the geyser force. At Yellowstone the subterranean action is near
the earth's surface and the geysers act as safety valves in draining off
this excess energy.

[Illustration: Off to view Yellowstone's wonders from horseback]

[Illustration: Castle Geyser erupts from an imposing crater]

[Illustration: Riverside Geyser throws its column over the Firehole
River]




                          OLD FAITHFUL GEYSER


Most famous of all geysers is Old Faithful. It is everything you would
expect to see in a geyser. Old Faithful has the showman's touch, as
well. With a rumbling fanfare and roll of drums beneath the thin shell
of the earth, Old Faithful goes into action. Then a hissing, boiling
pillar of water spurts into the air. Rapidly it gains momentum until it
reaches a height of 140 feet or more.

For four minutes it continues to play, and then gradually dies away.
Tiny wisps of steam linger a moment, and then disappear. Old Faithful
puts on its show within a few minutes of a specified time. The average
interval between eruptions is 65 minutes.

It is staggering to conceive just how much water Old Faithful hurls
skyward during each of its extraordinary performances. It has been
estimated, however, that in a single day this geyser discharges
approximately 250,000 gallons of water.

To see Old Faithful at night is, perhaps, the most wondrous sight of
all. A giant searchlight is thrown upon its towering plume, and the
steaming column of water, thus caught in the vivid, white light,
presents a spectacle which becomes an everlasting memory of your trip to
Yellowstone.

[Illustration: Old Faithful reaches for the clouds]


                             Other Geysers

Numerous other geysers equal or excel Old Faithful in volume or height,
but most lack its regularity. The Giant Geyser exceeds all others in the
amount of water expelled. Its jet of steaming water sometimes reaches
250 feet, and continues for an entire hour, but it gives no advance
notice of when it will burst forth.

[Illustration: Visitors examine the weird crater of Comet Geyser]

Other colorful geysers include the Beehive, Riverside, Grotto, Castle
and the Sawmill. Their descriptive names are derived from their
fantastic and unusual formations. For sheer individual splendor, the
Grand, Giantess and Fountain Geysers are noteworthy.


                           Pools and Springs

When you gaze into Firehole Lake jets of hot gas can readily be seen.
Since they look like flame, it is easy to understand why the early
trappers called this lake "Firehole."

There are other odd sights in the basins. Fountain Paint Pot looks like
a pot of boiling paint, but it is merely colored clay. Morning Glory
Pool is so named because of its flower-like cone. Black Sand Pool is a
hot spring. Sapphire Springs is accurately named. It is as blue as the
gem itself.


                         The Continental Divide

After leaving Old Faithful you will soon come to Kepler Cascade. Here a
whole series of captivating waterfalls descend about 150 feet, the magic
waters singing as they fall.

Continuing on toward Yellowstone Lake--your next stop--you cross the
Continental Divide. The Divide crosses the southwest corner of the Park.
This immense watershed was created by the tablelands of the Rocky
Mountains from which the drainage is easterly or westerly. Eventually
the flow on one slope reaches the Atlantic Ocean, and the flow on the
other slope finds its way to the Pacific Ocean.

[Illustration: Gibbon Falls]

[Illustration: Steaming Beryl Springs flows into the Gibbon River]

[Illustration: Famed Fishing Bridge entices hundreds to try their luck]




                            YELLOWSTONE LAKE


[Illustration: Speedboat party on Yellowstone Lake]

Yellowstone Lake covers approximately 139 square miles. Its shore line
is 100 miles long. One of the largest mountain lakes in the world, it is
a mile and a half above sea level. The blue of its waters against the
surrounding snow-capped mountains makes it one of nature's grandest
pictures.

[Illustration: Fishing on Yellowstone Lake]

Countless visitors spend as much time as possible at the Lake. After the
first visit this can be readily understood. It is ideal for camping and
fishing, and the stimulating air at this altitude is invigorating and
delightfully refreshing.

You may take a pleasant boat trip and explore its distant shores or, if
you wish, you may engage a motor- or rowboat, at a nominal rate, for a
pleasure cruise or to try your luck at angling. Boat trips to Stevenson
Island feature fishing, and fish-fries on the Island.

[Illustration: Yellowstone Lake, a mighty inland sea]




                    GRAND CANYON OF THE YELLOWSTONE


The Grand Canyon of Yellowstone, as seen from either Artist Point or
Inspiration Point, is one of the truly great wonders of the West. It is
hard to conceive such breath-taking beauty. Once you have gazed into its
jagged depths, alive with color, you will never forget it, nor would you
if you could.

Perhaps you stand on the rim, and gaze down into a seemingly bottomless
void. Eagles and fish-hawks quite likely will be circling far below. The
sides of the ragged pit will be painted with myriads of shifting,
changing, vivid colors, with shades of yellow predominating. In the
bright sunlight the canyon flames in glory. No sound comes from the
echoless, yawning gulf at the bottom.

Grand Canyon--richly named! From Artist Point it is nearly 1,600 feet to
the opposite side. There is a sheer drop of nearly 800 feet below the
platform on which you stand. Down there lies the green, serpentine
Yellowstone River. Your gaze follows the curve of the canyon to where,
in the distance, may be seen the silvery sheet of the Lower Falls
plummeting downward in a billowy cloud of misty spray.

You can also see the Canyon from other angles and obtain a fuller
realization of its majestic beauty. This may be done at Point Lookout,
or farther up, at the Grand View.

Time stands still at this mighty chasm. However long you stare in silent
wonder, it seems like but a fleeting moment.


                       The Upper and Lower Falls

As the Yellowstone River flows from Yellowstone Lake toward the Missouri
River and the Gulf of Mexico, it leisurely twists and winds through the
Park until, about fifteen miles from its source, the river is converged
to a width of less than fifty feet. Through foaming cataracts it
suddenly rushes forward to hurtle down 112 feet in a graceful fall known
as the Upper Falls of the Yellowstone. The velocity of flow is so great
at the crest that the water pours over the lip of the canyon in a
graceful arc.

On approaching the Grand Canyon, a good view of the Upper Falls may be
had from an observation point about one quarter mile below Chittenden
Bridge.

A short distance beyond the Upper Falls the swift, surging torrent again
comes to a mighty precipice, this time with a drop of 308 feet--the
famous Lower Falls. Plunging over, it leaps downward with a thunderous
roar, and disappears in a cloud of spray, presenting an unforgettable
picture. A third of the fall is hidden behind this vast cloud of spray
which conceals the mad play of the waters beneath.

[Illustration: Cascades of Yellowstone River]

[Illustration: The thundering Lower Falls of the Yellowstone]

Not far from Grand Canyon Hotel is a stairway leading to the top of the
Lower Falls. It may also be viewed from the lower end of Uncle Tom's
Trail which goes to the bottom of the Canyon. Looking upward at the
roaring cataract from that point, you are awed by its wild and
unharnessed power. Sunlight gives additional charm to the scene by
forming multi-colored rainbows in the filmy clouds of ascending spray.


                              Tower Falls

[Illustration: Graceful Tower Falls]

Leaving Grand Canyon, which you do reluctantly, your route is north to
Mammoth Hot Springs. Along the way many interesting sights are seen.
About midway between Canyon and Mammoth you see Tower Falls, one of the
most graceful waterfalls in the world. Plunging 132 feet into a
cavernous basin, rimmed with stately evergreens, the Fall gets its name
from the tower-like spires of rock that guard the river's approach to
the precipice.


                        Mammoth Hot Springs Area

From Tower Falls travelers follow the road to Mammoth Hot Springs, site
of the Park administration buildings.

Along the sides of the hill, from which the natural springs well, are a
group of steps or terraces over which flow the steaming waters of hot
springs, laden with minerals. Each descending step has been tinted by
the algae (plant life), living in the hot water, in a thousand tones. So
vivid are these colors that they appear to vibrate and glow in the
sunlight. Some of the older springs have now dried up, but about twenty
are still active.


                       More Geysers--Norris Basin

Upon leaving Mammoth Hot Springs, on the way back to West Yellowstone,
you come upon Norris Geyser Basin. Its geysers spout at frequent
intervals and its steam vents noisily erupt great volumes of vapor.
Constant, Minute Man and Whirligig are some of the geysers. Emerald,
Opal, Iris and Congress are a few of the pools.

[Illustration: Jewel-like Emerald Pool]

Enchanting Gibbon Falls will add another lingering memory of your trip
through Norris Geyser Basin.




                         YELLOWSTONE WILD LIFE


[Illustration: Moose]

[Illustration: Pronghorn]

[Illustration: Mountain Sheep]

[Illustration: Deer]

_Bears_ Yellowstone has long been renowned as a refuge for wild animals.
While the visitor may not see many animals from the highway, the silent
watcher on the trails will not be disappointed.

The famous Yellowstone brown and black bears are the ones most
frequently seen. The less-sociable grizzlies are seldom seen.

Park regulations forbid feeding, touching or teasing the bears. Observe
them _only_ from a safe distance.


                             Other Animals

Tramping a forest trail your footsteps may disturb a deer that bounds
away at your approach. In some of the grassy valleys of Yellowstone are
immense herds of elk. Bands of bighorn sheep scale the rocky heights
with amazing agility.

Buffalo roam the eastern section of the Park, away from the main roads.
Quite likely you will catch glimpses of other animals--antelope, moose,
coyote, beaver, porcupine, squirrel and mink, some of which are pictured
here.

More than 200 species of birds spend their summers in the Park. Eagles
may be seen among the crags. Wild ducks and geese are abundant. Many
large, white swans and pelicans lend charm to Yellowstone Lake.

[Illustration: A part of Yellowstone's buffalo herd]

[Illustration: Coyote]

[Illustration: A family of Yellowstone's Grizzly Bears]

[Illustration: Old Faithful Geyser and Old Faithful Inn]

[Illustration: Mother bear and cub go for a stroll]

[Illustration: An eager beaver]


                          Grasshopper Glacier

Just outside the northeast corner of the Park is a huge glacier on the
surface of which are the broken remains of millions of grasshoppers,
preserved through the centuries. Geologists tell us they were trapped
here while crossing the mountains in a summer snow storm.

[Illustration: Herd of elk on the alert]


                                Fishing

Yellowstone is a fisherman's dream come true. Nearly all the streams and
lakes contain one or more species of trout. Whitefish and grayling may
also be caught. Fishing equipment is obtainable in the Park. No license
required.

[Illustration: Yellowstone--a fisherman's paradise]


                       Other Forms of Recreation

Yellowstone offers many forms of healthful recreation. Hiking is
popular. Safe horseback trails beckon. Saddle horses and guides are
available at Mammoth Hot Springs, Old Faithful and Grand Canyon.
Swimming is enjoyed at Old Faithful and Mammoth, where pools, fed by
natural warm waters, are maintained. Suits and towels may be rented.


                             Entertainment

Every minute of the day is pleasant at Yellowstone and the evening
hours, too, are filled with fun. Impromptu entertainments, lectures,
music for dancing and for listening round out the day.

[Illustration: There's after-dinner entertainment as well]

[Illustration: Jackson Lake lies in a setting of Alpine loveliness]




                       GRAND TETON NATIONAL PARK


[Illustration: Church of the Transfiguration, Jackson Hole]

[Illustration: John Colter in Jackson's Hole]

Grand Teton National Park became known to white men in 1807-8 when John
Colter crossed the range on the memorable trip which resulted in his
discovery of Yellowstone. The northern extremity of the Park lies about
11 miles south of Yellowstone's southern boundary.

Grand Teton National Park contains about 96,000 acres, and is penetrated
by 90 miles of good trails. Besides its pinnacled peaks and majestic
canyons, Grand Teton includes five large lakes and dozens of smaller
bodies of water; glaciers, snowfields and a green forest empire of pine,
fir and spruce. Much of the Park is above timberline.

The great array of sharp, ragged peaks, which are called the "Teton
Range", present some of the grandest mountain scenery in the world.
Southwest of Jenny Lake is a cluster of steepled rock, the dominating
figure being Grand Teton, the famous mountain after which the Park is
named. The towering Grand Teton rises 13,766 feet, 7000 feet above the
floor of the valley.

Grand Teton National Park has a rich history. This fertile, green valley
and lake region is the historic "Jackson Hole" of pioneer days
notoriety, when it was famous as a hideout for outlaws. A large part of
it is now included in Jackson Hole National Monument.

The colorful title "Jackson Hole" dates back to 1829 when Capt. Wm.
Sublette named it for a fellow trapper, David E. Jackson.

By 1845 the romantic trapper of the "Fur Era" vanished from the Rockies,
and during the next four decades the valleys near the Tetons were
virtually deserted, except for wandering tribes of Indians who
occasionally drifted in. Later government expeditions making surveys of
the region named many of the Park's natural beauties--Leigh, Jenny,
Taggart, Bradley and Phelps Lakes, and Mount St. John--names which remain
today.

[Illustration: Car in Jackson's Hole]

[Illustration: Jackson Lake and Majestic Mt. Moran]

The Indian and the outlaw have vanished from this valley but it still
retains a flavor of the thrilling Wild West days. The colorful cowboy on
spirited pony still rides the range, singing to the cattle, but now he
occasionally climbs into the ranch's shiny station wagon and goes over
the pass to Victor to meet and bring incoming guests to the ranch, for
here are located some of the outstanding "dude ranches" of the West.

For years Jackson Hole has been famous for its big game. In this
classification the moose is the most common in the summer. In winter it
is the home of the world's largest herd of Wapiti, or American elk.
Other wild animals which inhabit the region include bear, mule-deer,
elk, Rocky Mountain sheep, beaver, marten, mink, weasel and coyote. Over
100 species of birds have been identified. A unique variety of wild
flowers and plants grow profusely in the Tetons. The flowering period
begins in the Park as soon as the ridges and flats are free of snow in
May and continues until about the middle of August.

Grand Teton National Park is most conveniently reached from Victor,
Idaho, on the Union Pacific Railroad. From Victor motor buses climb the
Forest Service highway to the top of Teton Pass. This lofty vantage
point offers a sublime view of the surrounding domain.




                                 LODGES


[Illustration: Looking across Jackson Hole to the Tetons]

Near the town of Moran, Wyoming, is Teton Lodge, and a short distance
farther north is Jackson Lake Lodge. Overlooking lovely Jackson Lake,
both command marvelous views of the sweeping Teton Range.

The central lodges and cabins are built of native logs. They are
equipped with hot and cold running water and are thoroughly comfortable.
Trips may be made in all directions from the lodges. Saddle horses,
motorboats, rowboats and automobiles may be hired at reasonable rates.

Modern campgrounds for pack trip parties are also available at Jenny and
String Lakes. These camps are supplied with running water, sanitary
facilities and cooking grates.

[Illustration: All set to hit the trail]




                              DUDE RANCHES


[Illustration: Dudes get a lesson in saddling-up]

While many of the ranches in the Jackson Hole country are operating
cattle ranches, they do accept a few guests during the summer months.
All have attractive, comfortable accommodations for those who wish to
indulge in horseback riding, fishing, mountain-climbing, hiking and the
regular activities of ranch life. Dude ranch life offers rugged outdoor
exercise, or pleasant relaxation. Certainly no more ideal spot can be
found for such a vacation than in this vicinity. Most of the ranches are
located in settings of natural beauty, with mountains, lakes and streams
near by. The hospitality of western ranch folk is warm and genuine.

For more complete information about dude ranches in the Union Pacific
West, including this area, inquire at any Union Pacific office listed on
page 40 of this book for a copy of Union Pacific's book "Dude Ranches
Out West".




                           YELLOWSTONE HOTELS


[Illustration: Charming Old Faithful Inn]

[Illustration: Old Faithful Geyser and Inn]

[Illustration: "The Bear Pit"]

The Yellowstone visitor is well housed and well fed. The hotels furnish
modern, comfortable accommodations, and only the finest of foods are
served.


                            Old Faithful Inn

Old Faithful Inn is unique among hotels. Constructed entirely of native
logs and stone, it is utterly charming. A massive fireplace in the
lounge gives forth warmth and cheerfulness for evening gatherings. Off
the lobby is "The Bear Pit," a charming cocktail lounge.


                              Canyon Hotel

[Illustration: Canyon Hotel ...]

[Illustration: ... and cocktail lounge]

Comparable in appointments to any metropolitan hotel, yet suited to its
wilderness setting, is Canyon Hotel near Grand Canyon. Its spacious,
glass-enclosed lounge, furnished with comfortable chairs and settees, is
a delightful place to relax after a day in the open.


                       Mammoth Hotel and Cottages

Headquarters of Yellowstone National Park are at Mammoth Hot Springs.
Here are located the office of the Park Superintendent and other
executive offices of the park administration, and of the public
utilities that operate in the park under government regulation and
supervision. A post office and museum are located at this point, as is
Mammoth Hot Springs Hotel. Mammoth is ideally situated in a charming
highland valley among some of the most striking mountain scenery in the
Park.

[Illustration: Mammoth Hot Springs Hotel and Dining Room]

[Illustration: Every minute is enjoyable on an escorted, all-expense
tour.]




                      ESCORTED, ALL-EXPENSE TOURS


Why not plan a real carefree vacation this summer by arranging to join
one of the congenial groups on an escorted tour, conducted by our
Department of Tours? All travel details are taken care of by a
courteous, informed escort who accompanies each party. You know in
advance exactly what your trip will cost and you are free to enjoy every
precious minute of your vacation. The tour parties originate in Chicago
and return to that city.

Some of the tours of Yellowstone National Park also include Grand Teton
National Park. Others return by way of Colorado, and include the circle
tour of Rocky Mountain National Park; others visit the scenic
wonderlands of Zion, Bryce Canyon and Grand Canyon National Parks in
Southern Utah-Arizona in combination with Yellowstone. There are tours
also to California which take in Las Vegas-Hoover Dam, Old Mexico, and
Yosemite National Park, as well as tours to the mountain wonderlands of
Colorado. There are also tours to the Pacific Northwest, returning
through Banff and Lake Louise.

For descriptive literature, reservations, etc., address C&NW-Union
Pacific, Department of Tours, 148 So. Clark Street, Chicago 3, Ill., or
any Union Pacific or Chicago and North Western representative.




                        SALT LAKE CITY STOP-OVER


[Illustration: Sunbathers by Salt Lake]

Travelers en route to or from Yellowstone may arrange to stop over at
beautiful Salt Lake City. Visitors come from all over the world to see
the famous Mormon Temple, or take a dip in Great Salt Lake--a novel
experience.

[Illustration: World famous Mormon Temple, Salt Lake City]

There is a free organ concert daily during the noon-hour for visitors to
the Mormon Tabernacle. There are many other interesting sights in and
around Salt Lake City.

[Illustration: Along the Madison River]


    INDEPENDENT MOTOR BUS TRIPS THROUGH YELLOWSTONE AND GRAND TETON
                             NATIONAL PARKS

Persons who travel independently by railroad make a complete all-expense
circle trip of Yellowstone, or in combination with Grand Teton National
Park, in comfortable, modern motor buses, operated by competent and
informed driver-guides. These circle trips assure your seeing all of the
outstanding sights within the Parks. Meals and lodgings are at the
hotels in Yellowstone.

                 SEE SUPPLEMENT FOR COSTS AND SCHEDULES




             TICKETS TO YELLOWSTONE PARK VIA UNION PACIFIC


Union Pacific serves West Yellowstone, Montana, directly on the Park's
western boundary, and during the Park season operates through sleeping
cars from the East direct to West Yellowstone.

During the Park season, also, round trip tickets are sold at nearly all
stations in the United States and Canada to West Yellowstone, Montana,
or to Victor, Idaho; or, going to West Yellowstone and returning from
Victor, or the reverse.

From any place in the United States tickets may be routed so passengers
enter the Park at West Yellowstone and depart from Victor, Idaho,
Gardiner, Gallatin or Red Lodge, Mont., or Cody, Wyo.--other gateways to
the Park.

Traveling Union Pacific to West Yellowstone from the East one can
include stopovers at Denver, Ogden and Salt Lake City.

Yellowstone is also a pleasurable side trip from Salt Lake City, Ogden,
or Pocatello for travelers to or from the Pacific Coast.

[Illustration: Union Pacific's attractive dining lodge, West
Yellowstone]




                          GENERAL INFORMATION


NATIONAL PARK SERVICE--The National Park Service, U. S. Department of the
Interior, has full jurisdiction over Yellowstone National Park and is
represented by a resident Superintendent, whose headquarters are at
Mammoth Hot Springs. The National Park Service, of which The Honorable
Newton B. Drury is Director, has jurisdiction over all national parks.

WHAT TO WEAR--Warm clothing should be worn, and one should be prepared
for the sudden changes of temperature common at an altitude of 7,500
feet. Visitors should have medium weight overcoats, jackets,
"windbreakers" or sweaters. Stout outing shoes are best suited for
walking about the geyser formations and terraces, and for mountain use.
Women's ordinary street shoes are not well adapted for these walks.
Tinted glasses, serviceable gloves and a pair of field or opera glasses
will be found useful.

BAGGAGE--The Yellowstone Park Company-Yellowstone Park Lines, Inc., and
the Teton Transportation Company will carry free, two pieces of hand
baggage for each person, not exceeding 60 lbs. in total weight.
Additional pieces of hand baggage, for complete tour of park--$1.00 each,
charged by Yellowstone Park Lines, Inc. and by Teton Transportation Co.
There is no arrangement for carrying trunks into the Parks.

CHURCH SERVICES--The chapel in Yellowstone National Park is located at
Mammoth Hot Springs. Protestant and Catholic services are held every
Sunday in the chapel and at other points in the Park, and are bulletined
in hotels.

BATH HOUSES--Natural hot-water bathing pools are maintained at Old
Faithful and Mammoth Hot Springs. Suit and towel may be rented at a
small charge.

MEDICAL FACILITIES--Physicians and a surgeon of long experience have
headquarters at Mammoth Hot Springs and are available for service at any
place in the Park. Also at Mammoth Hot Springs is a well-equipped
hospital with skilled personnel. Trained nurses are also stationed in
each hotel. Rates are the same as prevail in cities near the Park.

SADDLE HORSE TRIPS AND GUIDES--Saddle horses and competent guides are
available at the Yellowstone Park hotels and Jackson Lake Lodge at
reasonable rates approved by the National Park Service. Horseback trips
afford opportunities to get far away from roads and beaten paths into
the remoter scenic regions and to see many of the more timid wild
animals that inhabit the Park. The Dude Ranches in Jackson Hole offer
attractive outings.

[Illustration: Ranger-naturalists present educational evening lectures]

MAIL, TELEGRAPH AND TELEPHONE--The main post office in the Park is
Yellowstone Park, Wyo., and is located at Mammoth Hot Springs. Guests
stopping at hotels should have their mail addressed to Old Faithful
Store, to Canyon Hotel or to Mammoth Hotel, Yellowstone Park, Wyo.,
depending at which place the addressee will be when the mail is
received. Mail for travelers in Teton Park should be addressed care of
Jackson Lake Lodge, Moran, Wyo. Telegraph and telephone service between
all hotels; telegraph to all parts of the world; telephone connections
throughout the United States. Address your message to the hotel where
addressee will be. If the person is at some point other than that of
receipt, delivery of message entails a forwarding charge. Money
transfers at all hotels in the Park.

SPECIAL AUTOMOBILE SERVICE--The Yellowstone Park Company operates a few
sedans for those desiring this special service at additional cost.
Advance reservations must be made.

GUIDE AND LECTURE SERVICE--The National Park Service has established a
nature guide service at Mammoth Hot Springs, Old Faithful, Lake and
Canyon, where guides and lecturers are maintained on the naturalist
force to explain and interpret Park features to the public. Trips are
made afield, and are so arranged as to be available to everybody. This
service is free, as are the evening lectures on the history, geology,
flora and fauna.

At Mammoth Hot Springs is a combined museum and information office near
the administration headquarters and post office. There are interesting
museums also at Madison Junction, Old Faithful, Fishing Bridge and
Norris.

CONSULT UNION PACIFIC REPRESENTATIVES--Any Union Pacific representative
at the addresses listed on page 40 will be glad to help you plan a trip
to Yellowstone Park or to any of the other places reached by the Union
Pacific R.R.




                           FOR THE CAMERA FAN


[Illustration: For the Camera Fan]

Yellowstone has everything for the camera addict but the park presents
some subjects rather difficult to capture satisfactorily.

In either color or black and white the geysers are best photographed
with quartering or slightly back light. Use panchromatic film and a
fairly strong yellow filter or even a light red filter.

Color shots of Old Faithful are best made very early in the morning or
late in the afternoon. If you are lucky enough to catch a color shot of
an eruption against a sunset sky you will have a prize.

Hot pools demand considerable exposure to reproduce the color in the
depths of the pool. Do not waste time on hot pools if the day is cool
and steam obscures the subject. On such days the geysers give their best
photographic eruptions.

In shooting geysers use a fast speed. Expose for the white and let the
rest of the picture fall into a low key.

In using an exposure meter in Yellowstone, be careful to see that bright
areas in the foreground do not give a false reading.

Your questions regarding either still or moving picture photography in
Yellowstone will be answered fully if you will address Manager,
Photographic Department, Union Pacific RR, Union Pacific Bldg., 1416
Dodge Street, Omaha 2, Nebr.


HAYNES PICTURE SHOPS--Pictures, albums, guide books, postcards, camera
supplies and printing and developing service may be had at Haynes
Picture Shops located in the hotels and lodges and elsewhere in the
Park.




                   UNION PACIFIC . FIRST IN THE WEST


First to link East with West, Union Pacific is still first in furnishing
fast, comfortable, dependable, low-cost transportation. During the
summer season through sleeping cars operate from Chicago and Salt Lake
City to West Yellowstone, making convenient connections, at Ashton,
Idaho, for Victor, Idaho, for those desiring to visit Grand Teton
National Park only, or in combination with a trip to Yellowstone. For a
completely satisfying trip to any of the Western Wonderlands we suggest
you _Be Specific--Say "Union Pacific"_.

[Illustration: Eat appetizing meals ...]

[Illustration: ... relax in luxurious lounge cars]

In addition to Yellowstone, Union Pacific also serves:

[Illustration: PACIFIC NORTHWEST]

A trip to the scenic and magnificent Pacific Northwest can easily be
combined with a trip to Yellowstone.

[Illustration: SOUTHERN UTAH ARIZONA NATIONAL PARKS]

Zion, Bryce Canyon, Grand Canyon National Parks can easily be visited in
connection with a trip to Yellowstone, en route to California.

[Illustration: SUN VALLEY, IDAHO]

America's foremost vacation and sports center is just a short side trip
from Ogden, or Salt Lake City, Utah, or Pocatello, Idaho. Offers a
complete summer and winter sports program.

[Illustration: CALIFORNIA]

With a variety of climate, scenic attractions and outdoor activities,
California provides everything for the perfect vacation. Served by Union
Pacific over two routes.

[Illustration: COLORADO ]

The Rocky Mountain wonderland, where East meets West. Served by fine
Union Pacific trains from all parts of the country.


                    PLAN YOUR TRIP WITH EXPERT HELP


                              UNION PACFIC
                             TRAVEL OFFICES

Let one of Union Pacific's courteous and informed representatives assist
you with the details of your trip. There is no cost to you and you will
find his helpful suggestions will add materially to your enjoyment of
the trip. Write, phone, or call at any of the Union Pacific offices
listed below.


  Aberdeen, Wash.                                 3 Union Passenger Sta.
  Alhambra, Cal.                                    51 So. Garfield Ave.
  Astoria, Ore.                                       438 Commercial St.
  Atlanta 3, Ga.                                       1432 Healey Bldg.
  Bend, Ore.                                               1054 Bond St.
  Beverly Hills, Cal.                                9571 Wilshire Blvd.
  Birmingham 3, Ala.                                701 Brown-Marx Bldg.
  Boise, Idaho                               Idaho Bldg., 212 N. 8th St.
  Boston 8, Mass.                                     294 Washington St.
  Bremerton, Wash.                                         228 First St.
  Butte, Mont.                                     609 Metals Bank Bldg.
  Cheyenne, Wyo.                                         120 W. 16th St.
  Chicago 3, Ill.                                       1 S. LaSalle St.
  Cincinnati 2, Ohio                            303 Dixie Terminal Bldg.
  Cleveland 13, Ohio                                 1407 Terminal Tower
  Dallas 1, Texas                             2108 Mercantile Bank Bldg.
  Denver 2, Colo.                                    535 Seventeenth St.
  Des Moines 9, Ia.                                  407 Equitable Bldg.
  Detroit 26, Mich.                                       612 Book Bldg.
  East Los Angeles, Cal.                             5454 Ferguson Drive
  Eugene, Ore.                                        163 East 12th Ave.
  Fresno 1, Cal.                                        207 Rowell Bldg.
  Glendale 3, Cal.                                404-1/2 N. Brand Blvd.
  Hollywood 28, Cal.                                6702 Hollywood Blvd.
  Huntington Park, Cal.                               7002 Pacific Blvd.
  Kansas City 6, Mo.                                   2 E. Eleventh St.
  Las Vegas, Nev.                                  Union Pacific Station
  Lewiston, Idaho                                    Room 7, Union Depot
  Lincoln 8, Nebr.                                       234 S. 13th St.
  Long Beach 2, Cal.                                       144 Pine Ave.
  Los Angeles 14, Cal.                                  434 W. Sixth St.
  Memphis 3, Tenn.                                    1137 Sterick Bldg.
  Milwaukee 3, Wis.                                     814 Warner Bldg.
  Minneapolis 2, Minn.                       890 Northwestern Bank Bldg.
  New Orleans 12, La.                                    210 Baronne St.
  New York 20, N. Y., Suite 350       Rockefeller Center, 626 Fifth Ave.
  Oakland 12, Cal.                                215 Central Bank Bldg.
  Ogden, Utah                                     Ben Lomond Hotel Bldg.
  Omaha 2, Nebr.               Cor. 15th & Dodge Sts. or 1614 Farnam St.
  Pasadena 1, Cal.                                 Union Pacific Station
  Philadelphia 2, Pa.                             904 Girard Trust Bldg.
  Pittsburgh 22, Pa.                                   1419 Oliver Bldg.
  Pocatello, Idaho                                 Union Pacific Station
  Pomona, Cal.                                     Union Pacific Station
  Portland 5, Ore.                              701 S. W. Washington St.
  Reno, Nev.                                          209 American Bldg.
  Riverside, Cal.                                  Union Pacific Station
  St. Joseph 2, Mo.                                      516 Francis St.
  St. Louis 1, Mo.                                 1223 Ambassador Bldg.
  Sacramento 14, Cal.                                    217 Forum Bldg.
  Salt Lake City 1, Utah             Hotel Utah, Main and S. Temple Sts.
  San Diego 1, Cal.                                         320 Broadway
  San Francisco 2, Cal.                              Geary at Powell St.
  San Jose 13, Cal.                           206 First Nat'l Bank Bldg.
  San Pedro, Cal.                                    805 S. Pacific Ave.
  Santa Ana, Cal.                                        305 N. Main St.
  Santa Monica, Cal.                              307 Santa Monica Blvd.
  Seattle 1, Wash.                                      1300 Fourth Ave.
  Spokane 4, Wash.                                      727 Sprague Ave.
  Stockton 6, Cal.                                  206 California Bldg.
  Tacoma 2, Wash.                                       114 S. Ninth St.
  Toronto 1, Ontario                          201 Canadian Pacific Bldg.
  Tulsa 3, Okla.                                       823 Kennedy Bldg.
  Walla Walla, Wash.                              First Nat'l Bank Bldg.
  Washington 5, D. C.                                 600 Shoreham Bldg.
  Winston-Salem 3, N. C.                              632 Reynolds Bldg.
  Yakima, Wash.                                      Union Pacific Bldg.

                          UNION PACIFIC RAILROAD

                      Printed by Poole Bros., Chicago, Ill., U.S.A.--7-53

  [Illustration: Regional Map]

  [Illustration: Union Pacific Route Map]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Yellowstone and Grand Teton National
Parks, by Union Pacific Corporation

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YELLOWSTONE AND GRAND TETON ***

***** This file should be named 46291.txt or 46291.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/2/9/46291/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, the Mo-Ark Regional Railroad
Museum at Poplar Bluff, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

