Project Gutenberg's Practical Skunk Raising, by William Edwin Pratt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Practical Skunk Raising
       A Book of Information Concerning the Raising of Skunks for Profit

Author: William Edwin Pratt

Release Date: November 26, 2014 [EBook #47460]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRACTICAL SKUNK RAISING ***




Produced by Ruth Conway, Stephen Hutcheson, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the Library of Congress)









                               PRACTICAL
                             SKUNK RAISING.


   A BOOK OF INFORMATION CONCERNING THE RAISING OF SKUNKS FOR PROFIT.


                                   By
                          WILLIAM EDWIN PRATT.


                     Published by William E. Pratt.


                            Copyright 1915,
                          By WILLIAM E. PRATT.




                               CONTENTS.


  Chapter--
    1.--Introduction.
    2.--Ground.
    3.--The Fence.
    4.--Pens.
    5.--Dens.
    6.--Cage Litter.
    7.--Food Troughs.
    8.--Food House.
    9.--Feeding.
    10.--Water Troughs.
    11.--Examining Box.
    12.--Diseases.
    13.--Rats.
    14.--Disinfectants.
    15.--Hospital.
    16.--Breeding and Winter Management.
    17.--Barren Females.
    18.--Breeding Mothers.
    19.--Young.
    20.--Escapes.
    21.--Disarming.
    22.--How to ship skunks.
     Conclusion.




                        Practical Skunk Raising.


                          By William E. Pratt.

The supply of wild fur has already fallen behind the demand and the time
is in sight when wild fur will form but a small per cent of that in use.

All furs trapped in steel traps are less beautiful because the animal
suffers. It is a well-known fact that the less the animal suffers, the
better the fur.

The time is not far away when nearly all fur will be grown on
fur-ranches. Fur-farming unquestionably has a great future as an
industry.

Without detailing countless failures; it is well to begin by disposing
of the wrong idea that most people begin with, that all they need to do
is secure an island or a big fenced area, and throw in much feed to a
bunch of selected fur-bearers, and reap a harvest of so many pelts each
year.

The absurdity of this is seen if we compare it to a horse-breeder who
would put a high fence around a large pasture and turn in a couple
stallions and a dozen mares; throw in much feed daily, and expect a
harvest of so many colts, each year.

No,--success depends on general supervision and control of each
individual.

Skunks raise a better coat in captivity than when wild, because their
food is gotten without hunting for it, and are beyond danger of man,
dogs, and other intruders. Striped skunks ten years ago sold for one
dollar per pair, while only two dollars per pair was paid for "star
blacks". Three years ago or more these prices had doubled, and a skunk
with his scent glands out was even more valuable.

One male and two females is a good lot to begin with, which would
increase to twenty young the first year, and one hundred and fifty the
second, providing one could wait that long, and one certainly could not
expect any dividend until the fifth year.




                            2.--The Ground.


An acre of ground is sufficient to begin with, but one must have it
situated so one could increase to perhaps ten acres. It should be high,
dry and sandy, with some grass in the plot, and not too remote from a
railway station.




                             3.--The Fence.


An inexpensive fence to begin with may be made by setting posts in the
ground close together, but strongly. I recommend a fence made of wire
netting or steel set or inbedded in the ground from one to two feet.
First, dig a trench about one foot wide and two feet deep, and put heavy
rock in the bottom and thus, with the rock below the wire there will be
no way that the skunks can escape by digging.

The posts should be set ten feet apart. If set farther the wire will
have a tendency to sag. The wire should be of one and a half inch mesh
for the main fence, and one inch mesh for the breeding yards, as young
skunks sometimes escape through a one and a half inch mesh. No. 16, or
18, gauge wire from four to eight feet in height should be used. Any
smaller gauge than the above mentioned is not durable enough.

A wire or board inhang of twelve inches, should be placed at the top
rejecting in so the animals can't climb out. This is attached by slats
nailed along the tops of the posts and the wire nailed to them. Steel
sheeting needs no inhang, because it is so that the skunks cannot get a
foothold.

If the skunks dig at night to get out fill up the holes as soon as
possible and thus discourage the workers.

The big pen or large enclosure, serves as a range for the barren
females, males, and young skunks during autumn.




                               4.--Pens.


Many breeders consider pens better and cheaper than dens. These are
little runs about ten feet square, separated only by a three foot
netting which has an inhang or overhang as it is some times called, of a
foot on each side, so the skunks cannot climb in or out. If boards are
used for pens inside the big fence no overhang is needed. All pens
should be completely floored with mesh wire three or four inches under
surface.




                               5.--Dens.


Every cage or pen needs a movable den that is dry, sanitary, portable,
easy for observation, and warm. This last feature is important, for
skunks are sensitive to cold which causes pneumonia. The dens should be
well supplied with straw and rags, (avoid hay) because the seeds are
injurious to the nostrils.




                            6.--Cage Litter.


After trying smooth floored dens, and floors strewn with straw, chips,
ashes and sawdust; I feel safe in recommending sawdust, as its great
absorbent power helps to keep clean dens. It should cover the floor to a
depth of two inches.




                           7.--Food Troughs.


Do not use wooden troughs; they are unsanitary. Pie dishes either tin or
ware, will do if the sides do not flare. If they do the skunk usually
spills the milk or any liquid in the dish, by standing on the sides with
its paws.




                            8.--Food House.


The food and tool-house should be in the pen for convenience. There
should be mice and rat-proof vessels to keep the oatmeal and dry
biscuit, cheese, and meat in. It should be equipped with a large boiler
for boiling oatmeal and meat in. The meat may also be smoked as this
will preserve it, and is greatly preferred by the animals. The meat may
be hung out of reach of the rats in sacks.




                              9.--Feeding.


Skunks like most animals are omnivorous. A continuous unbroken diet of
meat would eventually wipe out the stock; as would a diet solely
vegetable. Moderate varied feeding is essential. Adult skunks are fed
once a day, they themselves prefer it after dark. Staple articles of
food are beef, rabbit, cow liver, chicken giblets, oatmeal, and other
porridge, cooked potatoes and milk; anything a dog will eat with fruit
and insects added. Be sure the meat is clear of infection.

Another staple article of food is a bread made of bran and shorts. Mix
with three quarts of sour milk, enough flour to make a stiff dough. Roll
dough out until it is an inch thick and bake for an hour like bread in a
hot oven.

This is much relished by all fur-bearing animals, and is still more
acceptable if flavored with a few spoonfuls of black molasses.

Milk must be given sparingly unless it agrees with the stock. Once a
week is enough, more than that is liable to induce scouring and other
disorders. Half a dog biscuit, and a few scraps of meat are enough for a
skunk's daily allowance. Of course some should have more than others
according to their needs.

A brood-mother growing or suckling her young should have as much as she
can eat twice a day, morning and evening.

When winter comes, skunks retire to their dens and eat nothing for
weeks. In March the feeding is resumed and in April the brood mothers
are extra fed with a preponderance of meat, much of it raw. It costs
from twenty-five cents to a dollar to feed a skunk from June first to
December first. Meat and fresh water are necessary at all times for
brood-mothers, for if this is neglected they will devour the young as
soon as born.




                          10.--Water Troughs.


Skunks drink much, and often. They must have plenty of fresh water at
all times; especially when the young are expected. The vessel that the
water at all times is kept in should be washed every day. In winter the
skunks lap up snow instead of water.




                          11.--Examining Box.


No cautious man would undertake to examine a wild skunk as he would a
dog or rabbit. Yet it is important to know sex and condition of each new
skunk as it arrives. This may be easily and quickly done by means of an
examining box. This is a small box 10" by 8" by 6" covered with a
chicken wire of about one inch mesh on the top. There should be a six
inch entrance at one end of the box.

On the solid wood bottom is a handle which is of course the top, when
the box is turned wire side down.

Chase the skunk in the entrance slowly and then lift the box up by the
handle and look under without fear. As soon as the operation is over the
skunk will seek his proper den.




                             12.--Diseases.


The keeper should watch the animal's dung, if too fluid or too soft, too
copious or too little, there is something wrong. Their appetite, and the
dung are the great tests. If these are right there is little chance of
anything being wrong.

Greed--Some cases often abound among skunks such as over-eating; by
getting all they can from the other skunks, after eating their own food.
Such freaks should be isolated and marketed as soon as possible.

Cannibalism--Sometimes when enclosures are small the mothers devour the
young as soon as born. This is sometimes the result of quarreling.
Always build the enclosures large enough so the skunks have plenty of
room.

Murder--Murder must be considered a disease. Some individuals are
incapable of it while others are very prone to it. The last mentioned
soon make themselves known. They should be marketed as soon as possible.

Distemper--This may be detected by the animal's eyes and nose running.
The animal should be sent at once to the hospital, and treated by
washing the nose and eyes with a solution of boric acid and water.

Mange--Mange is considered a serious disease, and is caused by fleas
which induce the animal to scratch. The fur gets thin and the body is
covered with scabs. This may be cured by applying a good flea powder and
a dip.

Worms--Worms may be eliminated by feeding the skunks in a dish of clear,
sharp, sand.

Other Foes--While the armed skunk travels about without fear of man or
beast, it must be remembered that the disarmed young skunks may be
killed by dogs, or taken by horned owls or any other large bird.




                               13.--Rats.


Rats are a great nuisance about a fur ranch. They often dig holes and
teach the young skunks the way to escape. They also kill the young, and
are quick enough to keep out of the way of the mother.




                          14.--Disinfectants.


Those I use are--Chloride of lime, peroxide of hydrogen, and lysol, 2%.

To disinfect a den, put it in a large tub and soak it in "sheep dip".

To disinfect a corner, sprinkle with chloride of lime.




                             15.--Hospital.


The hospital is a series of cages, quite removed from the other, with
the earth and grass for a floor, and good opportunities for a "sun
bath". Sick animals should be put in the hospital as soon as noted.




                  16.--Breeding and Winter Management.


The stock should be mated about November or December. Put one male to
four or five females. It is well to watch them for a few days to make
sure the group is harmonious. Often it happens that one female will
quarrel with the others.

She should be removed and tried somewhere else. If one is seen outside
the den constantly, this is the cause.

Put plenty of straw in the den and they will make themselves comfortable
enough.

During the winter they eat nothing. Some breeders deem it wise to feed a
light meal a week.

Mating time is from the middle of March, starting with February. Males
must not meet at this time for they will fight, until one or the other
is killed.




                          17.--Barren Females.


Three or four days after mating season has set in, remove the male and
try some other male in, or for a few days. As the males are decided in
their likes and dislikes. Neglect of this precaution will result in a
large proportion of barren females.




                         18.--Breeding Mothers.


By April first every female should be given a separate den, and well fed
and cared for.

This is the most important time of all, success or failure depends on
the management of the mother at this time. Toward the end of the month
she should be given raw meat and plenty of water. This diet should be
given until mid-May, as this allays the meat craving which causes the
mother to devour the new-born young.

I will repeat again the watchwords of success--

Proper sanitation, seclusion, and quiet, an abundance of raw meat and
fresh water.

The period of gestation is nine weeks; the young are born in mid-May.

The young females have from four to six young the first litter and the
older females have from eight to sixteen to one litter.

Never put two females with young, in the same house for they will fight
and steal one and anothers' young.

One family in one house is a good old rule to observe.

When one month old they are able to walk around and drink milk. I would
advise disarming and weaning at this time.




                              19.--Young.


The young grow very fast and soon become as tame as kittens, some show
their amazing temper at this age, from the beginning.

At thirty days they walk alone and drink milk. At sixty days they will
weigh on the average of six lbs. each, and appear to be half grown. At
six months they are full-grown, and weigh from four to six lbs.

At this age they are ready to be marketed.




                             20.--Escapes.


It is well to be prepared for escapes. A properly constructed fence will
prevent this.

Two contrivances should be in stock--net and traps.

Net--This is an ordinary dip net to put over them.

Traps--These are box traps, or "catch-alives". They are easily
constructed, and one half dozen will be found convenient for many
purposes.




                            21.--Disarming.


To prevent a shot from this deadly battery of the skunk they are
disarmed while very young. When animals are young the operation is a
simple one; but when performed when they are grown not more than one out
of three survives the operation.

When ready for disarming, spread a burlap or gunnysack across your lap
and order the assistant to bring the skunk. He must be careful to hold
it by the tail, with it near the ground. The sack is then rolled around
the animal; rear exposed.

The assistant holds the animal firmly and double muffles the eyes, so it
cannot possibly see. A skunk seldom shoots unless it sees an enemy.

The proper instruments consist of a scalpel, clamping forceps,
extracting forceps, hook and goggles.

The scent sacks are located one on each side of the vent off one fourth
inch from the vent.

To disarm--First make an incision three eighths of an inch long and one
half an inch from the vent.

As soon as the incision is made, cut deeper until the scent sac appears,
which is about the size of a bean in young skunks and about the size of
a marble in mature ones.

With the blunt forceps, force the adhering muscles down off the sac, and
cut the sac off one fourth inch from the vent.

If the operation is done according to instructions, there will be no
loss whatever.

Animals do not require disarming unless they are going to be shipped. If
skunks are raised solely for fur, it is just as well to leave them
armed.

Express companies refuse to ship them unless scent sacks are removed.




                        22.--How to Ship Skunk.


Secure them when ready for market, by using a box-trap. Never try to
handle them.

To ship them, put each in a small soap-box lined with tin.

Cut a hole three inches square in the side and cover it with wire of one
inch mesh.

Fasten a tin in one corner of the box three inches from the bottom for
water. Above this make a hole to pour water through.

Mark it "water here". Make a lid in the box for convenience in feeding.

One pound of dog biscuits, or bread, and a few scraps of meat will amply
supply a skunk on the road. Label the bag "Seven days food".

Do not fear to lift the lid and look in, for a skunk must be greatly
alarmed and provoked before discharging musk.




                              Conclusion.


If the material in this book is thoroughly understood and mastered, and
the reader is the proud possessor of two "star-black" skunks in a plot,
fenced secure against escape, in five years he can reap large dividends.

                [Illustration: Decorative tree in pot.]




                          Transcriber's Notes


--Silently corrected a few palpable typos.

--Retained the original (expired) copyright notice from the printed
  copy.







End of Project Gutenberg's Practical Skunk Raising, by William Edwin Pratt

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRACTICAL SKUNK RAISING ***

***** This file should be named 47460.txt or 47460.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/4/6/47460/

Produced by Ruth Conway, Stephen Hutcheson, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the Library of Congress)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

