The Project Gutenberg eBook, From the Australian Front, by Anonymous


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: From the Australian Front


Author: Anonymous



Release Date: December 22, 2014  [eBook #47737]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FROM THE AUSTRALIAN FRONT***


E-text prepared by Brian Coe, Christian Boissonnas, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images
generously made available by Internet Archive/American Libraries
(https://archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the numereous original illustrations.
      See 47737-h.htm or 47737-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/47737/47737-h/47737-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/47737/47737-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      https://archive.org/details/fromaustralianfr00lond


Transcriber's note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

      Superscripted text is enclosed in curly brackets
      (example: 2{nd}).





FROM THE AUSTRALIAN FRONT


[Illustration: "Cook."

Drawn by Will Dyson.]


FROM THE AUSTRALIAN FRONT

The Net Profits from Sales will be devoted
to Australian Soldiers' Patriotic Fund







Cassell and Company, Ltd
London, New York, Toronto and Melbourne
1917




_The Photographs in this book are reproduced from Australian
and British official negatives taken by the following official
photographers--Capt. F. Hurley, Lieut. E. Brooks, Lieut. H. F. Baldwin,
and Lieut. G. H. Wilkins, A.F.C._




[Illustration: Header showing mounted soldier and horse-drawn wagon.]




INTRODUCTION


At Christmas, two years ago, as a result of the hard work of its
Editors and other members of the A.I.F., we were presented with an
excellent production in the form of the "Anzac Book." That was our
second Christmas at war. We are now approaching our fourth, and let
us hope it may be the last one during which we shall find ourselves
fighting. Our kind friends have again come forward and presented us
with a book, not quite so ambitious as the "Anzac Book" was, but one
which we hope will convey to those whom we left behind in Australia,
and who we know are thinking of us, some idea of our surroundings on
the battle fronts of the Australians; and which carries with it our
whole-hearted hopes and good wishes for those at home.

With it, I feel I have the privilege of sending my most grateful thanks
to all for their past work, and my best of good wishes to every member
of the A.I.F. for the future.

[Illustration: Signature]

  FRANCE,
  _28th September, 1917_.

[Illustration: Footer showing soldiers walking]

[Illustration: "What! Last another five years?"]

[Illustration: The Leader: A Winter Snapshot of General Birdwood and
his Chief of Staff.]

[Illustration: The Abbey de Bertin, St. Omer.]

[Illustration: Winter in France.

The Jock: "Weel, Anzac, and what are ye going to do when the war's
ower?"

Frozen Bill: "Me? I'm goin' to the centre of Australia for two bloomin'
years to thaw out."]

[Illustration: The Arrival in Flanders.]

[Illustration: One of the Earliest Battalions to enter the Trenches in
France.]

[Illustration: One of the Early Billets: A Bomb School in Flanders.]

[Illustration: Snapped in a Farm in Flanders.]

[Illustration: The Headquarters Cook-house in the Peaceful Line.]

[Illustration: In the Early Days: An Estaminet reached by jumping out
of the Communication Trench within 800 yards of the Front Line.]

[Illustration: The Dug-outs which we used to build.]

[Illustration: The Trenches amongst the Summer Flowers.]

[Illustration: In the Peaceful Line.]

[Illustration: No-Man's-Land in the Peaceful Line.

It was across exactly such a spot, but wider, that the Australians
charged when first they entered heavy fighting in France before
Fromelles, on July 19, 1916.]

[Illustration: Pozieres.

Just after midnight on July 23, 1916, those Australians who had been
brought South and put into the Great Battle of the Somme, attacked and
took this village. A few walls and rafters were then remaining.]

[Illustration: The Chalk-pit past which they approached.]

[Illustration: "Gibraltar."

A reinforced concrete entrance to a cellar and German dug-out. The
surrounding house had long been blown away.]

[Illustration: One of the old 5.9 Howitzers taken in the First
Assault.]

[Illustration: Sausage Valley: The Busiest Thoroughfare in the
Australian World in those Days.]

[Illustration: A Famous Staff at Breakfast in Sausage Valley.]

[Illustration: Fatigue Parties in the Moonlight.]

[Illustration: Ammunition Wagons galloping past the Long Guns in
Sausage Valley.]

[Illustration: A Gun of the R.A.G.A. near Fricourt.]

[Illustration: The Bombardment of Pozieres by the Germans in the First
Days of August, 1916.]

[Illustration: Pozieres Windmill: The Summit of the Somme.

Captured on August 4 after two heavy fights.]

[Illustration: Centre Way, near Pozieres Church.]

[Illustration: One of the "O.G." Lines near Pozieres Windmill.

They were blotted out here by bombardment.]

[Illustration: The Main Street of Pozieres from Centreway Trench.]

[Illustration: The Church at Pozieres.]

[Illustration: The Cemetery at Pozieres.]

[Illustration: Machine-gunners coming out past Casualty Corner:
Contalmaison in the distance.]

[Illustration: A Victorian Brigade straight out of Pozieres passing
another Victorian Brigade on its way in.]

[Illustration: Mouquet Farm: The Next Stage in the Pozieres Fight.

Looking towards Pozieres, which is about a mile away beyond the crest.]

[Illustration: Australians in the Dressing-station at Becourt Chateau
during the early days of Pozieres.]

[Illustration: The Shell-holes of Pozieres Village during the following
Winter.]

[Illustration: Unveiling the Memorial put up to one of the Australian
Divisions which fought at Pozieres.]

[Illustration:

Brother Dost Thou See Them

A Soldier of the Cross (Iron)

Come Let Us Join Our Cheerful Songs

He Liveth Long Who Liveth Well (The Battalion Q.M.S.)

Throw Out the Life-line

One There Is Who Loves Thee

Knocking Knocking Who Is There

Where Is My Boy Tonight.

What Means This Eager Anxious Throng (The Rum Ration)

  W L King
  60{th} Batt
  A I F

Hymn Titles Adapted.]

[Illustration: In the Field Dressing-station.

The Padre: "Are you an R.C., my lad?"

The Hard Case: "No, I'm a machine-gunner."]

[Illustration: Officer: "Why do you not salute?"

Anzac: "Well, to tell you the truth, digger, we've cut it right out."]

[Illustration: Remembrances?

"What does that noise remind you of?"

"'Ome on a Saturday night."]

[Illustration: Shell- and Mine-torn Ground at Hill 60, Ypres.]

[Illustration: The same: Very Extensive Defensive Works were undertaken
by the Australian Troops at Ypres in 1916 during the short time within
which they stayed there.]

[Illustration: Australians Re-entering the Somme in the Autumn, 1916.
Mud-splashed Gun-teams along the road to Montauban.]

[Illustration: A Cook-house in Montauban.]

[Illustration: The Field Cooker in a Winter Billet behind the Somme.]

[Illustration: Fritz's Folly: Scene of a Winter Fight on the Somme.]

[Illustration: The Somme Mud: In the Trenches.]

[Illustration: Where the Mud was a Tragedy: The Carriage of the
Wounded.]

[Illustration: The First Immense Alleviation: Tramways.]

[Illustration: A Second Alleviation: The Duckboards.]

[Illustration: The Somme Mud: At the Water Point, Montauban.]

[Illustration: A First Improvement in Trenches: A Dry Trench in the
Front Line.]

[Illustration: Flers: Held by the Australians all the Winter.]

[Illustration: Factory Corner near Flers: A Notable Point during the
Winter.]

[Illustration: A Precious Consolation: Hot Coffee in Jam Tins at the
Comfort Fund's Stall, Longueval.

The two splendid men who are serving in this picture were both killed
when the Town Hall at Bapaume was blown down by a delayed German mine.]

[Illustration: The Winter Hospital: In the Chapel at Millencourt.]

[Illustration: The Canteen: Behind the Somme.]

[Illustration: All that is Left of Gueudecourt--the Pond and the
Church.]

[Illustration: Machine Gun Firing at an Aeroplane.]

[Illustration: Martinpuich.]

[Illustration: Optimism.

"Well, thank God, at least there are no flies!"]

[Illustration: Stiffness.

1st Anzac: "Blime, digger, we're stiff. Beer's all froze."

2nd Ditto: "Wonder if they'll sell it by the block."]

[Illustration: A "Rum" Fellow But "Somme" Boy.

John P. Davis

A.I.F

(53{rd} Bn.)]

[Illustration: Across the Snow, Near Flers, Jan. 1917.

The Duckboards.]

[Illustration: The Butte De Warlencourt, March 23{rd} 1917.

The Butte; When we were able to look back on it.]

[Illustration: The Snow: Near Bazentin.

The latter part of the winter was very bitter, with six weeks'
continuous frost, but immensely preferable to the mud of the earlier
months.]

[Illustration: Australian Transport in the Snow.]

[Illustration: A Game of Pitch-and-Toss amongst the Reserve Troops.]

[Illustration: Spoiling the German Coal-dump in the Winter's
No-Man's-Land.

On February 24, 1917, the Germans were found to be evacuating their
lines on the Somme. This photograph shows men getting coal from the old
German railway dump, which all the Winter had been in No-Man's-Land
before Le Sars. The Butte of Warlencourt appears in the background.]

[Illustration: Engineers beginning on the Track across "The Maze," part
of the old German Front Line which had been held all the Winter.]

[Illustration: German Heavy Shell searching for Australian Batteries
which had been hurriedly pushed forward to Eaucourt l'Abbaye.]

[Illustration: Supports waiting in the Public Grounds at Bapaume--its
old Fortress Moat--on the day on which they followed the Germans
through the Town.]

[Illustration: The Streets of Bapaume on the Day of its Occupation.

It had been blown up and burnt by the Germans.]

[Illustration: A Band playing in Bapaume the Day after its Capture. The
Town was still Burning.]

[Illustration: Bapaume Town Hall.

A mine with delayed fuse was under the building at the time this
photograph was taken. It blew up a few days later.]

[Illustration: Australian Transport halted in Bapaume when the Streets
had just been cleared.]

[Illustration: One of the Villages which were taken after Sharp
Fighting as the Advance began to approach Cambrai.]

[Illustration: An Australian Battery coming into Position beyond
Bapaume.]

[Illustration: An Impression.]

[Illustration: Bringing up Rations.]

[Illustration: One of the Villages in the open beyond Bapaume.

Most of the trees throughout this country were cut down by the Germans
before leaving.]

[Illustration: The Hindenburg Line taken on April 11, 1917, and again
on May 3.]

[Illustration: Shrapnel-Burst over our Stretcher-Bearers.]

[Illustration: A Trench Mortar in the Hindenburg Line.]

[Illustration: The Advanced Ambulance Wagon during the Bullecourt Days.]

[Illustration: The Winter in Northern Billets.

Even in the best trenches the mud was a problem.]

[Illustration: The Division which broke through the Hindenburg Wire
reviewed by Gen. Birdwood after the Fight.]

[Illustration: An Australian Artillery Officer's Home on the Somme.]

[Illustration: Gen Birdwood presenting Captain H. Murray, V.C., with
the Ribbon of the D.S.O. to which he Won a Bar at Bullecourt. (Gen.
Holmes in the background.)]

[Illustration: How Rations to Troops _should_ be Served.]

[Illustration: How they Serve _Themselves_ if Allowed to.]

[Illustration: Overheard in a French Village.

The Boy: "Hello, Bully Beef!"]

[Illustration: From a Christmas Letter.

  "I was eatin' Christmas puddin' in the mud,
    When a whizzbang 'it me collar wiv a thud,
  An' I honestly expected that me bits 'ud be collected,
    But my luck was in--the beggar was a dud."]

[Illustration: "I say, cobber, got 'ny room in there for me an' another
bloke?"]

[Illustration: "When we had to thaw our boots before we could put them
on our remarks were not pleasant to hear."]

[Illustration: 1. My Home in Dixie.]

[Illustration: 2. My Home with a Dixie.]

[Illustration: Australians studying the large Contour Map which was
made for the Troops to give them a good knowledge of the country around
Messines over which they had to attack.]

[Illustration: A Wagon rushing a road during the German shelling of our
Batteries before Messines.]

[Illustration: A German Shell bursting during the Messines Battle.]

[Illustration: All that is left of the German Front Line at Messines.]

[Illustration: A German Shell-burst during the Battle of Messines.]

[Illustration: Battle of Messines: A Lorry-load of Australians watching
a Burning Dump which had been hit by the German Shelling.]

[Illustration: The Ridge at Messines: Scene of the Attack on June 7,
1917.]

[Illustration: All that is left of Messines.]

[Illustration: A German Concrete and Steel Blockhouse of the type which
Australians first met at Messines.]

[Illustration: A German Concrete Blockhouse at Messines.

Showing bits of the old "camouflage" for screening it on top, and the
sockets for machine-gun ammunition let into the rear face of it.]

[Illustration: A German "Pill-Box" Shelter at Messines.]

[Illustration: Messines: Wounded Coming Back during the Fight.]

[Illustration: Maj.-Gen. W. Holmes, C.M.G., D.S.O., Killed near
Messines shortly after the Battle.]

[Illustration: An Australian Heavy Howitzer in Action.]

[Illustration: Coming out of the Line for a Rest.]

[Illustration: Behind the Lines: H.M. The King, with Gen. Birdwood
leaving an Australian Sports Ground.]

[Illustration: Fatigue Work somewhere on the Somme Front.]

[Illustration: Extract from Intelligence Report:

"Yesterday two of our pigeons failed to return."]

[Illustration: Divisional Baths.

Billjim: "'Ow do yer git into the bloomin' bath, digger?"

Orderly (thoughtfully): "Do yer see that tap? Well, crawl up through
it."]

[Illustration: Some Duds.

1. Fritz: "Vill ve not another strategic retreat make when I haf nice
fixed up my dug-out?"

2. Christmas Cheer--A Dud.

3. Apres la Guerre--Another Dud.]

[Illustration: "Somebody's Darling."]

[Illustration: My God!]

[Illustration: A Brigade A.F.A. out for a Brief Rest after many months
in the Firing Line.]

[Illustration: Part of an old big Crater at Hill 60, near Ypres.]

[Illustration: Beginning of the Battle beyond Ypres: A Howitzer in
Action.]

[Illustration: A Siege Battery in Action: Firing a Howitzer.]

[Illustration: How the Guns are Worked in Gas.]

[Illustration: A Scene on a Road near Ypres.]

[Illustration: Ruins of the Cloth Hall, Ypres.]

[Illustration: Shell Bursting amid the Ruins of Ypres.]

[Illustration: Ruins at Ypres.]

[Illustration: Ruins at Ypres.]

[Illustration: A Big Crater. This was 75 yards in circumference.]

[Illustration: After the Battle of Menin Road.

Wounded waiting to be taken to the dressing-station.]

[Illustration: Clearing the Roadway.]

THE GIRL HE LEFT BEHIND.

(With apologies to Capt. Bruce Bairnsfather.)

[Illustration: France, 11.30 p.m. "I wonder if the same dear old Moon is
shining through her bedroom window."]

[Illustration: Blighty, 11.30 p.m. The Girl: "How annoying this beastly
old Moon is!"]

[Illustration: One of the old Platoon.

Drawn by Will Dyson.]

[Illustration: Food for the Guns.]

[Illustration: Scene in an Advanced Dressing-Station.]

[Illustration: A Shell burst in Glencorse Wood.]

[Illustration: Australian Pioneers construct a Roadway while the Battle
is proceeding.]

[Illustration: Boche Prisoners assisting to bring in our Wounded.]

[Illustration: Conducting Battle Operations.]

[Illustration: Communications must be kept up at all costs, and
these men are seen going to run out New Lines during the Battle of
Zonnebeke.]

[Illustration: The Effect of a 9.2 British Shell on a Reinforced
Concrete German Dug-out.

The dug-out was some feet below the surface of the ground and the
concrete roof and wall were over 2 feet thick.]

[Illustration: A Boche Residence that is practically Shell-proof.]

[Illustration: An Australian Pigeons Dispatch Rider leaving Signals
H.Q.]

[Illustration: The Fight for the Ridges: A Procession of Boche
Prisoners to our rear.]

[Illustration: Boche Prisoners wearing their Characteristic Helmets.]

[Illustration: The Fight for the Ridges: The Type of Ground over which
the Advance was made during September.]

[Illustration: A Few "Empties" used during the Battle of Zonnebeke.]

[Illustration: A Captured Strong Point.

Note the great thickness of concrete above the entrance.]

[Illustration: A Captured Flammenwerfer.]

[Illustration: The Fight for the Ridges: The Advanced Line in
Shell-holes.]

[Illustration: After a Battle: Wounded awaiting Ambulance Transport.]

[Illustration: What it Feels Like without a Pass when on Leave.]

[Illustration: The Clean Page--When?]

PRINTED BY CASSELL & COMPANY, LIMITED, LA BELLE SAUVAGE, LONDON, E.C.4
F. 1000. 1117




  +----------------------------------------------------------------- +
  | Transcriber's note:                                              |
  |                                                                  |
  | Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note.     |
  +------------------------------------------------------------------+



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FROM THE AUSTRALIAN FRONT***


******* This file should be named 47737.txt or 47737.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/7/7/3/47737


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

