The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Brochure Series of Architectural
Illustration, vol. 06, No. 10, October 1900, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Brochure Series of Architectural Illustration, vol. 06, No. 10, October 1900
       The Chateau of Chambord: France, Louis XVI. Sconces

Author: Various

Release Date: January 8, 2015 [EBook #47916]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BROCHURE SERIES ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Haragos Pal and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          THE BROCHURE SERIES
                       The Chateau of Chambord:
                                France
                          Louis XVI. Sconces
                             OCTOBER, 1900


[Illustration: PLATE LXXV      CHAMBORD: SOUTHERN FACADE]





                                  THE
                            BROCHURE SERIES
                    OF ARCHITECTURAL ILLUSTRATION.

                    1900.      OCTOBER      No. 10.




                       THE CHATEAU OF CHAMBORD:
                                FRANCE


The Chateau of Chambord is one of the most unique palaces of the
Renaissance in existence. "It is," writes Jules Loiseleur, "the
Versailles of the feudal monarchy; and was to the Chateau of Blois,
that central residence of the Valois, what Versailles was to the
Tuilleries,--the country-seat of royalty. Tapestries from Arras,
Venetian mirrors, curiously sculptured chests, crystal chandeliers,
massive silver furniture, and miracles of all the arts, were amassed in
this palace during eight reigns, and dispersed in a single day by the
breath of the Revolution.

[Illustration: LANTERN OF THE GREAT STAIRCASE      CHAMBORD]

"It has often been asked why Francis I., to whom the banks of the Loire
presented many marvelous sites, selected such a wild and forsaken spot
in the midst of arid plains for the erection of the strange building
which he planned. His peculiar choice has been attributed to his
passion for the chase and also because of the memory of his amours
with the beautiful Comtesse de Thoury, whom he had visited in that
neighborhood before he ascended the throne. Independently of these
motives, which no doubt counted in his selection, perhaps the very
wildness of the place and its distance from the Loire, which reminded
him too much of the cares of royalty, was a determining reason. Kings,
like private individuals, and even more than they, experience the
need at times of burying themselves, and therefore make a hidden and
far-away nest where they may be their own masters and live to please
themselves. Moreover, Chambord, with its countless rooms, its secret
stairways, and its subterranean passages, seems to have been built for
one who, tired of the blaze of royal glory, sought here for shadow and
mystery. At the same time when he was rearing Chambord in the heart of
the uncultivated plains of the Sologne, Francis I. built in the midst
of the Blois de Boulogne a chateau, where, from time to time, he shut
himself up with learned men and artists, and to which the courtiers,
who were positively forbidden there, gave the name of Madrid, in memory
of the prison in which their master had suffered. But Chambord, like
Madrid, was not a prison; it was a retreat.

[Illustration: PLATE LXXVI      CHAMBORD: GENERAL VIEW]

"That sentiment of peculiar charm which is attached to the situation
of Chambord will be felt by every artist who visits this strange
creation. At the end of a long avenue of poplars breaking through thin
underbrush you see, little by little, peeping and mounting upward from
the earth, a fairy building, which, rising in the midst of arid sand
and heath, produces the most striking and unexpected effect. A _jinnee_
of the Orient, a poet has said, must have stolen it from the country of
sunshine to hide it in the country of fog for the amours of a handsome
prince. The park in which it is situated is twenty square miles in
area, and is surrounded by twenty miles of walls."

Francis I. had passed his early years at Cognac, at Amboise or
Romorantin, and when he first saw Chambord it was only an old feudal
manor house built by the Counts of Blois. There has been much question
as to who the architect he employed to transform it really was, and
the honor of having designed the splendid residence has been claimed
for several of the Italian artists, who early in the sixteenth century
came to seek patronage in France. It seems well established today,
however, that Chambord was neither the work of Primaticcio, with whose
name it is tempting to associate any building of this king's, nor of
Vignola, nor of Il Rosso, all of whom have left some trace of their
sojourn in France, for the methods of contemporary Italian architecture
were totally different; but as M. de la Saussaye, the author of a very
complete and concise history of the building, proves, it was due to
the skill of that fertile local school of art and architecture around
Tours and Blois, and more particularly to a comparatively obscure
genius, whose name is also mentioned in connection with Amboise and
Blois, one Pierre le Nepveu, known also as Pierre Trinqueau, who is
designated in the papers which preserve in some degree the history of
the origin of the edifice as the _maistre de l'oeuvre de maconnerie_.
"Behind this modest title apparently," writes Mr. Henry James, "we must
recognize one of the most original talents of the French Renaissance;
and it is a proof of the vigor of the artistic life of that period
that, brilliant production being everywhere abundant, an artist of so
high a value should not have been treated by his contemporaries as a
celebrity. We manage things very differently today."

Although Le Nepveu was the chief architect, Cousin, Bontemps, Goujon,
Pilon and other noted artists were engaged in the decoration of
Chambord. Many changes in the structure were afterwards carried out,
especially by Louis XIV. and by Marshal Saxe, to whom that monarch
presented it in 1749. From 1725 to 1733 Stanislaus Leszczynski, the
ex-king of Poland, who spent the greater part of his life in being
elected and in being ousted from his throne, dwelt at Chambord. During
the Revolution the palace was as far as possible despoiled of every
vestige of its royal origin, and the apartments to which upwards of two
centuries had contributed a treasure of decoration and furniture were
swept bare. In 1791 an odd proposal was made to the French Government
by a company of English Quakers, who had conceived the bold idea of
establishing in the palace a manufacture of some peaceful commodity not
today recorded. Napoleon I. presented Chambord to Marshal Berthier,
from whose widow it was purchased in 1821 for the sum of L61,000 raised
by national subscription on behalf of the Duke of Bordeaux, formerly
Comte de Chambord.

[Illustration: PLATE LXXVII      CHAMBORD: NORTHERN FACADE]

The Chateau, only the north part of which is completed, consists of
two square blocks, the larger of which, five hundred and twelve feet
long by three hundred and eighty-five feet broad, encloses the smaller
in such a way, that the northern facade of the one forms the centre of
the northern facade of the other. The corners of each block terminate
in massive round towers, with conical roofs crowned by lanterns, so
that four of these towers appear in the principal facade. In plan it
will be seen that Chambord resembles the typical French chateau; with
the habitation of the seigneur and his family in the centre, and this
habitation enclosed on three sides by a court, while like most feudal
dwellings, the central donjon shares one of its sides with the exterior
of the whole. The central part is adorned with an unexampled profusion
of dormer-windows, turrets, carved chimneys and pinnacles, besides
innumerable mouldings and sculptures, above all of which rises the
double lantern of the tower containing the principal staircase.

"It is a forest of campaniles, chimneys, sky-lights, domes and
towers, in lace-work and open-work, twisted according to a caprice
which excludes neither harmony nor unity," writes M. Loiseleur. "The
beautiful open-work tower of the large staircase dominates the entire
mass of pinnacles and steeples, and bathes in the blue sky its colossal
fleur-de-lis, the last point of the highest pinnacle among pinnacles,
the highest crown among all crowns.

"We must take Chambord for what it is, an ancient Gothic chateau
dressed out in great measure according to the fashion of the
Renaissance. In no other place is the transition from one style to
another revealed in a way so impressive and naive; nowhere else does
the brilliant butterfly of the Renaissance show itself more deeply
imprisoned in the heavy Gothic chrysalis. Chambord, by its plan
which is essentially French and feudal, and by its enclosure flanked
with towers, and by the breadth of its heavy mass, slavishly recalls
the mediaeval _manoirs_. By its lavish profusion of ornamentation it
suggests the creations of the sixteenth century as far as the beginning
of the roofs; it is Gothic as far as the platform; and it belongs to
the Renaissance when it comes to the roof itself. It may be compared
to a rude French knight of the fourteenth century, who wears on his
cuirass some fine Italian embroideries, and on his head the plumed felt
of Francis I.,--assuredly an incongruous costume, but one not without
character."

"With a sympathetic denial of any extreme over-technical admiration,"
writes Mr. Cook in his _Old Touraine_, "Viollet le Duc gives just that
intelligible account of the Chateau which is a compromise between the
unmeaning adulation of its contemporary critics and the ignorance of
the casual traveller. 'Chambord,' says he, 'must be taken for what it
is; for an attempt of the architect to reconcile the methods of two
opposite principles,--to unite in one building the fortified castle
of the Middle Ages and the pleasure-palace of the sixteenth century.'
Granted that the attempt was an absurd one, it must be remembered that
the Renaissance was but just beginning in France; Gothic art seemed
out of date, yet none other had established itself to take its place.
In literature, in morals, as in architecture, this particular phase in
the civilization of the time was evident, and if only this transition
period is realized in all its meanings, with all the 'monstrous and
inform' characteristics that were inevitably a part of it, the mystery
of this strange sixteenth century in France is half explained."

[Illustration: PLAN OF THE CHATEAU OF CHAMBORD]

"At Chambord," writes Mrs. Pattison, in her _Renaissance of Art in
France_, "which was building in 1526, the stories are, it is true,
forcibly indicated, but the whole building is pulled together in Gothic
fashion by the towers of the _corps de logis_, and by those which
flank the pavilions or wings which stretch out on either side of the
main body. In a building of the size of Chambord the result of this
treatment is hardly satisfactory, for the lines of the wings to right
and left of the main body seem to droop away from the heavy towers on
either side. Inside the court, however, the unpleasant effect, even at
Chambord, disappears, for the apparent length of the wings is greatly
abbreviated by the effect of the two spiral staircases which run up
outside the building at the internal angles on opposite sides.

[Illustration: PLATE LXXVIII      CHAMBORD: FRANCIS I. WING]

"Chambord is, indeed, throughout truly typical of the earlier stage
of the new Renaissance movement. In the general arrangement, in the
_ordonnance_, late Gothic caprice and fantastic love of the unforeseen
rule triumphant. The older portions of the Chateau, the seemingly
irregular assemblages of half Oriental turrets and spires, are debased
Gothic, full of audacious disregard of all outward seeming of order.
The architect, instead of seeking to bring home to the eye the general
law, the plan on which the whole is grouped, has wilfully obscured and
concealed it beneath the obviousness of the wild and daring conceits
heaped above.

[Illustration: VIEW OF CHAMBORD (1576)      ENGRAVING FROM DU CERCEAU]

"But even at Chambord the mark is set which promises other days. It
is the transition moment; Gothic fancy may wildly distribute ornament
and obscure design, but the ornament which it distributes is Gothic no
longer. The _obscaena_ which haunt the cathedrals of the middle ages,
which infest the earlier towers of Amboise, and linger defilingly about
Gaillon, are banished. In their place come faint foliated traceries and
arabesques in low relief, enriching every surface, disturbing none,
moving with melodious adaptation of subtle line, winding, falling,
rising in sympathy with every swiftly ascending shaft or hollowing
curve.

"It is not now possible to approach Chambord carrying in our eyes a
vision of the great Renaissance palace, as engraved by Du Cerceau in
his _Plus excellens Batimens de la France_. Burdened by the weighty
labors of Louis XIV., weakened by eight improving years at the hands
of Stanislaus Leszczynski, mutilated by Marshal Saxe, the Chambord
which we now go out from Blois to visit is not the Chambord of Francis
I. The broad foundations and heaving arches which rose proudly out of
the waters of the moat no longer impress the eye. The truncated mass
squats ignobly upon the turf, the waters of the moat are gone; gone
are the deep embankments crowned with pierced balustrades; gone is the
no-longer-needed bridge with its guardian lions. All the outlying work
which gave the actual building space and dignity has vanished, and we
enter directly from the park outside to what was once but the inner
court of the Chateau.

"It is not until we stand within this inner court--until we have passed
through the lines of building which enclose it on the western side, and
which show the unmistakable signs of stupid and brutal destruction,
that we can believe again in the departed glories of Chambord.
Lippomano, ambassador from Venice to France in the reign of Henry III.,
turned out of his way to visit Chambord. 'On the 21st,' he says, 'we
made a slight detour in order to visit the Chateau of Chambord, or,
more strictly speaking, the palace commenced by Francis I., and truly
worthy of this great prince. I have seen many magnificent buildings
in the course of my life, but never anything more beautiful or more
rich. They say that the piles for the foundations of the Chateau in
this marshy ground have alone cost 300,000 francs. The effect is very
good on all sides. The number of the rooms is as remarkable as their
size, and indeed space was not wanting to the architect, since the
wall that surrounds the park is seven leagues in length. The park
itself is full of forests, of lakes, of streams, of pasture-land, and
of hunting-grounds, and in the centre rises the Chateau with its gilt
battlements, with its wings covered in with lead, with its pavilions,
its towers and its corridors, even as the romancers describe to us the
abode of Morgana or of Alcinoues. More than half remains to be done,
and I doubt it will ever be finished, for the kingdom is completely
exhausted by war. We left much marvelling, or rather let us say
thunderstruck.'

[Illustration: PLATE LXXIX      CHAMBORD: STAIRCASE, FRANCIS I. WING]

"To destroy the character of Chambord from the outside was not
difficult. It was not easy to tame the rude defiance of Vincennes, or
give facility to the reserved and guarded approaches of Gaillon. Solid
rectangular towers, heavy machicolations, and ponderous drawbridges
offer a stubborn resistance to schemes of ruthless innovation; but
Chambord was no fortress, it was a country house. The very site is
motived by no other reason than the pleasures of the chase. The
battlements of Gaillon gave back the echoes of the trumpet, but the
galleries of Chambord resounded with the huntsman's bugle.

"The construction of these galleries in itself points to the rapid
progress of social change. There are not only such as may be called
covered passages communicating from the spiral staircases with the
rooms on each story; galleries which have their special cause in actual
need and daily use; but the roofs of the range of one-storied buildings
which connect the side wings on the north and south, and which run
along the western front, are finished up from the cornice with a
balustrade, and turned into a promenade for courtiers.

"Yet in spite of these marked indications of change the ancient spirit
lingers. The unrestrained freedom of grotesque caprice finds expression
everywhere, even in those later portions which belong to another reign.
Pierre le Nepveu has left on all his work the imprint of profuse and
fantastic force; the outlines of his cupolas strike the sky with an
audacity which seems to defy the adverse criticism of those who moved
within the limits of more cautious rule. Symmetrical balance, for which
the masters of a succeeding era sought, and by which they strove to
harmonize every portion of their design, obliged them to reject the
aid of those varied resources which Le Nepveu shrewdly marshaled with a
vigorous hand.

"Chambord is in truth a brilliant example of transition. The early
Renaissance is there to be seen, taking on itself the burden beneath
which the failing forces of the Gothic spirit had sunk. But the
intention of the work is wholly foreign to the main direction taken
by the new movement, and condemned, by its very nature, to remain, in
spite of the wonderful genius lavished upon it, an unfruitful _tour de
force_."

The interior of the palace is now but a great wilderness of hewn
stone. The sixteenth century treasures of art which had adorned it
were all stolen or destroyed in the Revolution, the spoliation being
so complete that it was stripped of even the carved wainscots, panels,
doors and shutters, and the four hundred and forty enormous apartments
now give only the impression of a vast and comfortless barrack. In the
original arrangement of the interior all ideas of practical defense
were sacrificed to produce a pleasure palace, and it was furnished with
innumerable secret stairways (there are thirteen great staircases, not
to mention numberless smaller ones) isolated turrets and a hundred
facilities for what the gallant Viollet le Duc calls "_les intrigues
secretes de cette cour jeune et tout occupee de galanteries_."

"On the whole," writes Mr. Henry James, "Chambord makes a great
impression--there is a dignity in its desolation. It speaks with a
muffled but audible voice of the vanished monarchy, which had been so
strong, so splendid, but today has become a sort of fantastic vision. I
thought, while I lingered there, of all the fine things that it takes
to make up such a monarchy; and how one of them is a superfluity of
mouldering empty palaces."




                              A Change in
                          The Brochure Series


The attention of subscribers to THE BROCHURE SERIES is again called to
the fact that, beginning with the Seventh Volume, January, 1901, the
magazine is to be enlarged, and that the subscription price will then
be increased to $1.00 a year, and the price of single copies to ten
cents each.

[Illustration: PLATE LXXX      CHAMBORD: FROM THE WEST]




                          LOUIS XVI. SCONCES


[Illustration: FROM FONTAINEBLEAU]

[Illustration: FROM VERSAILLES]

[Illustration: FROM DOUAI]

[Illustration: FROM FONTAINEBLEAU]

[Illustration: PLATE LXXXI      CHAMBORD: THE ROOFS]

[Illustration: FROM FONTAINEBLEAU]

[Illustration: FROM VERSAILLES]

[Illustration: FROM VERSAILLES]

[Illustration: FROM VERSAILLES]

[Illustration: PLATE LXXXII      CHAMBORD: DORMERS AND CHIMNEYS]




                          Transcriber's Note:


Italics are indicated by _underscores_.

Small capitals have been rendered in full capitals.

Ligatures [oe] have been converted into oe.

A number of minor spelling errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Brochure Series of Architectural
Illustration, vol. 06, No. 10, October 1900, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BROCHURE SERIES ***

***** This file should be named 47916.txt or 47916.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/9/1/47916/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Haragos Pal and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
