Project Gutenberg's The Romance of the Ranchos, by E. Palmer Conner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Romance of the Ranchos

Author: E. Palmer Conner

Release Date: November 11, 2016 [EBook #53500]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROMANCE OF THE RANCHOS ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, MFR and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                                  _The
                             Romance of the
                                Ranchos_


                                  _by_
                            E. PALMER CONNER
                         _Chief Title Searcher_


                   Title Insurance and Trust Company
                        433 South Spring Street
                              Los Angeles

          _Reprinted by permission from the Los Angeles Times_
                             Fifth Edition

    [Illustration: _Old Plaza Church_
    "_Where Los Angeles began_"]




                         Ranchos of California


Picture a map of California cut up into Ranchos like a crazy quilt,
dotted with twenty-one Missions and a handful of Pueblos. Picture a
people browned by the sun, happy, prosperous and carefree. Picture a
white-walled hacienda on each of the ranchos, every one open with a
never failing hospitality and welcome. That was California when the
Americans took it.

With the advent of American ownership the tide of population turned to
California in a never ending stream. By sail, steamboat, covered wagon
and finally by train came a new people. The great Spanish ranchos soon
passed to new owners and took on a new character. There is a record of
Spanish ranchos traded for nearly every commodity and necessity. Ranchos
like the Malibu and the Centinela exchanged for wines and groceries, the
Los Alamitos bought with hides and tallow, the La Canada deeded for an
attorney's fee, ranchos for horses, for vines, for surveyor's fees and
many ranchos for mortgages.

It was a period of rare honor. Don Abel Stearns refused to take
advantage of a technicality in his favor and lost a 29,000 acre rancho.
Juan Matias Sanchez to help his friends, William Workman and F. P. F.
Temple, signed their mortgage to "Lucky" Baldwin and lost his own rancho
in the San Gabriel Valley, wholly without consideration.

With progress and development the ranchos gave way to the towns and
farming communities. Many of these towns, now grown to cities, were
named for the ranchos on which they were built. In Los Angeles County,
Ranchos Santa Monica, San Fernando, Azusa, La Canada, Puente and Tujunga
all gave their names to the towns founded within their borders. Santa
Ana and La Habra in Orange County likewise took their names from their
ranchos. Santa Barbara was an original Spanish Pueblo but still farther
north in San Luis Obispo County, Arroyo Grande, Pismo, Santa Margarita,
Atascadero and Paso Robles all correspond with the rancho of the same
name.

Many names of roads and highways all over California can be traced
directly to the rancho over which they pass. Many others were named for
an illustrious owner, who perhaps in bright velvet and astride a silver
saddle, rode down the same road when California was a land of great
ranchos in the days of the Dons.




                      Rancho Topanga Malibu Sequit


Among the ranchos of Los Angeles County Rancho Topanga Malibu Sequit,
more commonly known as the Malibu Ranch, is outstanding. Not that it was
the first of the grants, although in fact it was one of the first, or
because it was the largest, although its acreage of 13,315 was exceeded
by few, but the historic rancho has in its almost intact state outlived
all others and today it stands as "The Last of the Ranchos."

The Malibu was first granted in 1804 to Jose Bartolome Tapia by Jose
Joaquin de Arrillaga, Military Governor of the Californias, acting for
the King of Spain. It bordered the Pacific for miles and extended back
into the mountains,--a princely domain unexcelled for beauty.

The heirs of Tapia held the property until January 24, 1848, when they
granted the great rancho to Leon Victor Prudhomme of the Pueblo of Los
Angeles for the sum of $400, $200 to be paid in cash and $200 in
groceries and wines. As the heirs were uncertain as to the true name of
the rancho they gave four names under which it had been known and
concluded by reciting that it was bounded on the north by the high
mountains, on the south by the Pacific Ocean, on the east by the Rancho
Santa Monica and on the west by the mouth of the River of San
Buenaventura. The recital that the rancho was bounded on the south by
the Pacific Ocean is correct as the rancho faces the ocean more
southerly than westerly.

Prudhomme also had a famous vineyard near Cucamonga and in order to
devote all of his time to the vineyard he sold the Rancho Topanga Malibu
in 1857 to Matthew Keller, known in Spanish days as Don Mateo Keller,
for $1400. Mateo Street in Los Angeles is named for Mr. Keller.

In 1872 an agreement was entered into between Matthew Keller and Mrs.
Carrie S. Lewis for conveyance of the rancho to Mrs. Lewis for $35,000,
a little less than $3.00 an acre, but the buyer failed to complete the
deal and Matthew Keller remained the sole owner until his death in 1881.

In 1892 in two conveyances H. W. Keller, son of Don Mateo Keller and
assignee of the other heirs, sold the property to May K. Rindge and
Frederick H. Rindge for approximately $10 per acre. Mrs. Rindge is now
President of the Marblehead Land Company, owner of the property, and it
is now being developed into a seaside residential district.

From Tapia to Prudhomme, Prudhomme to Keller, Keller to Rindge--surely a
very brief history of a great rancho--yet today its value is figured in
tens of millions of dollars--surely a great advance from the days when
it was traded for the wines and groceries.

    [Illustration: _Twenty-Mile Shore Line of the Rancho Topanga Malibu
    Sequit_]




                 Ranchos Los Cerritos and Los Alamitos


The lives of two persons seldom parallel themselves more strangely than
did the lives of two great California ranchos, the Rancho Los Cerritos
and the Rancho Los Alamitos. Both were part of the Manuel Nieto grant
made in 1784 by the King of Spain, each was partitioned to a Nieto heir,
each became the property of a New Englander and each owner naturalized
as a citizen of Mexico. They rivaled each other for the honor of the
finest sheep, the fattest cattle, the fastest horses. Together they
became the property of the Bixbys, jointly they shared the growth of
Long Beach and finally they divided the honor of Signal Hill--Los
Cerritos the northwesterly slopes, Los Alamitos the southeasterly
slopes.

Juan Temple was one of the New Englanders who early settled in Los
Angeles when California was a part of Mexico. At one time Temple ran the
mint for the government of Mexico. Later he opened the first general
merchandise store in Los Angeles, advanced the City of Los Angeles funds
for Ord's Survey, built the first theater, the County's first Court
House and the Temple Block, recently wrecked to make way for Los
Angeles' new City Hall. Temple Street is named for him.

Not only did Temple naturalize as a citizen of Mexico, but he married a
Spanish girl of a prominent family. Dona Rafaela Cota became his bride
and by this marriage Temple acquired one-twelfth of the Rancho Los
Cerritos, then owned by Rafaela and her eleven brothers and sisters,
heirs of Manuela Nieto de Cota. The remaining eleven-twelfths was not so
easily acquired and it cost Don Juan "$3025 in silver coin and an equal
amount in merchandise at market prices" to complete his ownership of the
27,000 acre rancho.

In 1844 the large hacienda, yet standing on the Virginia Country Club
grounds, was built and occupied by the new owners. Until a short time
before his death Juan Temple divided his time between his big Rancho and
his many interests in the Pueblo of Los Angeles. In 1866 he sold the
hacienda, the cattle, the sheep, the horses and the 27,000 acres for
$20,000 and removed to San Francisco where he died. Benjamin and Thomas
Flint and Llewellyn Bixby were the fortunate purchasers.

Meanwhile, adjoining Los Cerritos on the East, Rancho Los Alamitos had
had a similar career. Another heir of Manuel Nieto to whom this 28,000
acre Rancho was partitioned, sold it in 1834 for $500 to
Brigadier-General Jose Figueroa for whom Figueroa Street in Los Angeles
is named, and at one time Governor of California under Mexico.

In 1840 the Estate of Figueroa sold the Rancho, composed of "six sites
of grown up cattle" to Don Abel Stearns for $5500 to be paid in hides
and tallow to be laid down at San Pedro or at Mazatlan. Don Abel Stearns
was the other New Englander who became famous as a Mexican citizen. Like
Temple he, too, married into a Spanish family and was equally prominent
in affairs of the Pueblo of Los Angeles.

The same drought that caused a terrific loss of stock and forced Juan
Temple to sell Los Cerritos for $20,000 proved fatal to Don Abel's
ownership of the Los Alamitos and eight months after the Flints and
Bixby bought Los Cerritos the Sheriff sold Los Alamitos to Michael Reese
for $31,000, approximately $1.10 an acre. In 1881 the Estate of Michael
Reese sold the rancho to John W. Bixby, who in turn conveyed a one-third
interest each to I. W. Hellman and Jotham Bixby. Under the Bixbys both
ranchos flourished.

When the Bixbys purchased Rancho Los Cerritos and later Rancho Los
Alamitos nothing was farther from their thoughts than that they were
purchasing the site of the future City of Long Beach but they had the
good judgment to hold their land and California, oil and Iowa did the
rest.

Four thousand acres of Los Cerritos were sold in 1880 by Jotham Bixby
Company to W. E. Willmore, who platted Willmore City, surrounded by the
American Colony Tract, composed of farm lots. Tremendous effort was put
forth by Mr. Willmore to make his city successful. He advertised all
over the country and even ran a special excursion from Chicago with
prospective Willmoreans. But the plan was premature and not enough
purchasers could be found to buy the city lots at $25.00 to $100.00 each
or the farm lots at $15.00 an acre to enable Willmore to meet his
agreement with the Bixbys and several years later he abandoned the land
to them.

But Willmore had planned well--his streets were wide, 80 and 100 feet
being usual, and one, American Avenue, being 124 feet wide, and the
natural beauty of the land and ocean frontage made it attractive to
others. Soon a syndicate under the name of Long Beach Land & Water
Company took up the sale of the lots and Willmore City took the name of
Long Beach.

Now the two families of the Bixbys, one from their hacienda, the former
home of Don Juan Temple on the Los Cerritos, the other from their
hacienda, the former home of Don Abel Stearns on the Los Alamitos,
watched Long Beach grow from a subdivision to a city. The Alamitos Tract
and the Townsite of Alamitos Bay were platted.

In 1897, William A. Clark, Montana Copper King and builder of the San
Pedro, Los Angeles & Salt Lake Railroad, purchased 8,139 acres of Rancho
Los Cerritos for $405,000. This vast tract, known as the Montana Ranch,
has been held practically intact to the present day. Early development,
however, is planned for this property by the Janss Investment Company,
Los Angeles Realtors, who have announced that they will build a model
city on the ranch.

In 1921 the secret of Signal Hill was discovered and an added impetus
given the development of the two ranchos. Soon the hill bristled with
oil derricks. There being then many owners there soon were many
millionaires. Oil flowed so fast from the hill that on several occasions
it streamed uncontrolled over lawns and flowers on the slopes of Signal
Hill. Daily the value of the oil taken from the hill equalled twice the
price the Bixbys paid for both ranchos.

Slowly the oil fields have been extended--northwesterly toward the
hacienda of Don Juan Temple and southeasterly toward the hacienda of Don
Abel Stearns.




                     Rancho Aguaje de La Centinela


Traded with two barrels of wine for a small adobe house in the Pueblo of
Los Angeles, then in turn owned by a noble Spaniard, an ignoble
Frenchman, a famous Confederate General and a Scotch Baronet, then the
scene of one of the most spectacular boom subdivisions in the Land Boom
of 1886-1888 and finally the site of a prosperous and successful
city--such is the history of the Rancho Centinela.

The rancho was granted in 1844 by the "Department of California,"
Government of Mexico, to Ignacio Machado by a grant which described the
land as "half a league more or less of grazing land." Machado did not
prize his grazing land very highly and the following year traded the
property to Bruno Abila for a small adobe house "with vineyard fenced"
in the suburbs of the Pueblo of Los Angeles. But in the eyes of these
two traders, the small adobe was worth more than the great Rancho
Centinela and the deed provided that in addition to the rancho Machado
was to give as an added consideration two barrels of aguardiente (wine).

Bruno Abila held the rancho until 1857 at which time he carelessly--or
desperately--borrowed $900 with interest at six per cent per month, or
seventy-two per cent per year, and, giving his rancho as security,
promptly lost it under the hammer. Hilliard P. Dorsey bought the
property at Sheriff's Sale for $2000, or about $1 an acre.

But Hilliard P. Dorsey paid too much for the land and two years later
Civility R. Dorsey, his widow, sold it out of his Estate for $930, or
thirty-five cents an acre. However, the deed to Francis I. Carpenter,
the purchaser, provided that he, Carpenter, was obligated as part of the
consideration to run off and dispossess of his own effort one Fernando,
a Frenchman and son-in-law of Bruno Abila, a former owner, who had
refused to surrender peaceable possession of the rancho.

The next owner of the rancho was Joseph Lancaster Brent, a Southerner by
birth, but for many years a prominent citizen of Los Angeles. In 1860,
just before the Civil War started, Brent sold his rancho and at the
outbreak of the war hastened to make his way south and join the
Confederate Army. He was later made a Brigadier-General and was with the
last Confederate General to lay down his sword. The conveyance by Brent
was made for a consideration of $3,000 to Sir Robert Burnett, a Baronet
of Scotland, who on a visit to California had fallen in love with the
natural charm of the Rancho Centinela and purchased both it and its
neighbor, the Rancho Sausal Redondo.

From this time on the value of the rancho grew rapidly and in 1885 Sir
Robert Burnett and Lady Matilda Josephine Burnett, both of Crathes
Castle in the Kingdom of Great Britain, sold the two ranchos for
$140,000 to Daniel Freeman, the founder of Inglewood.

Then came the great Land Boom, the town of Inglewood was platted and
thrown on the market. Beautiful parks and plazas were planned and
dedicated and Mr. Freeman, with an insight into the future that now
seems uncanny, platted streets of unheard of width.

Used as cattle land by the Spanish, sheep land by the Baronet and a Boom
Subdivision by Daniel Freeman, the Rancho Centinela has attained its
greatest period of usefulness and success today as the site of the
thriving City of Inglewood.

    [Illustration: _Ranch Home on the Rancho Aguaje de La Centinela_]




                           Rancho San Pascual


The Rancho San Pascual has always been a famous ranch. Its owners have
always been prominent in the affairs of California and in the Pueblo of
Los Angeles. It has always been famed for beauty and today within its
far-flung boundaries are the world famous cities of Altadena, Pasadena,
South Pasadena and parts of San Marino.

The rancho was granted in 1843 by the then Mexican Governor, Manuel
Micheltorena, to Manuel Garfias and comprised 13,693 acres of land.
Manuel Garfias later became Los Angeles County's first Treasurer. At the
time he was campaigning for the office of Treasurer he sold a portion of
his rancho for approximately $3.00 an acre for funds with which to
finance his ambitious plans.

Manuel Garfias was a member of one of the finest Spanish families and
married Luisa Abila, whose family owned the Abila hacienda facing the
Plaza in the Pueblo of Los Angeles and where Commodore Stockton resided
while stationed in Los Angeles. History records that Manuel Garfias was
an excellent County Treasurer but as a ranchero he was very poor and bit
by bit he sold off parts of the rancho until in 1857, heavily involved
in financial obligations, he sold the remainder of the rancho to B. D.
Wilson, the famous Don Benito. Wilson Avenue in Pasadena, South Pasadena
and Alhambra, Wilson Lake and Mt. Wilson are all named for B. D. Wilson.
Under his care and under the guidance of Dr. John S. Griffin, who
purchased an undivided one-half interest from Mr. Wilson, the Rancho
progressed and the price of the land gradually increased.

The early conveyances of parts of the Rancho in addition to the usual
indefinite ties of an oak tree, a little rock set on a big one or a pile
of bones or brush, tied in one of its courses "to a point on the side of
a hill North of the prickly pears." Many of the descriptions tied to the
walled garden of Benjamin D. Wilson, called "Huerta de Quati."

Later the Rancho was settled by the Indiana Colony, Pasadena was
founded, then South Pasadena and San Marino and today within its
boundaries are many thousands of magnificent homes, carrying on the fame
of the famous Rancho San Pascual.




                         Rancho Santa Gertrudes


Seventeen thousand six hundred and two acres of California's most
fertile land, bordered by a large river, divided by two smaller ones and
with a billion dollar oil pool beneath--the Rancho Santa Gertrudes sold
under the hammer for $3.40 an acre.

The rancho was a part of the great Manuel Nieto grant made by the King
of Spain through the Spanish Governor, Pedro Fages. The Nieto grant was
divided among his heirs and Antonio Maria Nieto received the part
designated as the Rancho Santa Gertrudes and in 1834 the Mexican
Governor, Jose Figueroa, confirmed the title to Dona Josefa Cota, widow
of Antonio Maria Nieto.

Later the rancho was conveyed to Lemuel Carpenter, born a Missourian,
but for many years a resident of California when it was a part of
Mexico. For awhile Carpenter and his beautiful wife, Maria de Los
Angeles Dominguez de Carpenter, lived happily on the rancho. They
prospered under Mexico but failed under the United States and on
November 14, 1859, the rancho was sold by the Sheriff. One week before
the day of the sale Carpenter committed suicide.

John G. Downey and James P. McFarland, doing business as Downey,
McFarland & Company, were the purchasers at the sale, paying $60,000 for
the entire rancho. Both of these men were famous characters in
California history. Downey became the Civil War Governor of the State
and McFarland a leading State Senator. Together they opened the first
drug store in Los Angeles, and Downey, with Alvinza Hayward, organized
the first bank.

In 1865 the rancho was leased for twenty-five years to the Los Angeles
Pioneer Oil Company for exploration and development of oil. But,
although the oil company diligently explored, no oil could be found and
the lease was finally abandoned.

The Town of Downey was started in 1873 with a boom and predictions were
freely given that the new city would soon outdistance its sleepy
neighbor, Los Angeles.

Toward the east boundary of the rancho the Town of Fulton Sulphur
Springs and Health Resort was platted. But few lots were sold until 1886
when the Santa Fe Railway built its line through the town, bought up all
the lots and replatted them into smaller ones, planned a big hotel and
renamed the town Santa Fe Springs. How foolish the silver-tongued land
auctioneers made the purchasers appear when they bought lots, then at
$200 apiece. How foolish would the same auctioneers look today if they
could see their town of Santa Fe Springs--a city of derricks--a bonanza
of "Black Gold."

    [Illustration: _Night at Santa Fe Springs on the Rancho Santa
    Gertrudes_]




                           Rancho San Antonio


No horses so fast, no cattle so fine, no land so fertile, no rancho more
famous than the Rancho San Antonio. No family more prominent, no
hospitality more welcome or as freely partaken, no hacienda more lovely,
happy or prosperous than that of the Lugos.

Antonio Maria Lugo received the grant of the rancho from the King of
Spain in 1810 and for fifty years thereafter this old Spanish Don and
his sons were the sole owners of its 29,514 acres, adjoining the
original pueblo grant of the City of Los Angeles on the southeast.

The Lugos saw the rise of the Mission chain to the height of its glory,
then the passing of Spanish control and the rise of Mexico, the breaking
up of the Mission chain, the fall of Mexico and the coming of the Stars
and Stripes. Wars and governments came and passed and the Lugo family
stood them all and kept their rancho intact. They built a wonderful
adobe in the pueblo of Los Angeles facing the Plaza directly opposite
the church and there the social life of the city centered.

But American ways and American prosperity they could not stand and as
the County grew, bit by bit they lost their vast rancho by sale,
foreclosure and litigation.

In 1865 the Sheriff sold the home place of Vicente Lugo, one of the
sons, for a consideration of less than $1.00 an acre. With the
conveyance went a large wooden house constructed by the younger Lugo,
one of the first wooden houses in the County. In 1883 Jonathan S.
Slauson, founder of Azusa and for whom Slauson Avenue is named,
purchased the land constituting what had been the home place for $200 an
acre. In 1910 the heirs of Slauson sold the land for $500 an acre.

In 1927 part of this land was sold for a consideration of $7,000 an acre
for the site of the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company's plant. Only the
cluster of trees now shows where the great wooden house once stood while
hundreds of workmen pass daily over the paths and gardens of the noble
Don Vicente.

On other parts of the rancho have been built Huntington Park, Vernon,
Walnut Park, South Gate and Lynwood, all prosperous communities. The
original adobe house of Antonio Maria Lugo is yet standing on Baker
Avenue opposite the Southern California Edison Company's Power Station
and near the Union Plant of the Consolidated Steel Corporation.

The Lugos builded well and both the hacienda and the city home on the
plaza are still in good condition. Both should be landmarked and
properly preserved--testimony to the finest in life and honor in the
days of the Dons.

    [Illustration: _No Hacienda More Lovely Than That of the Lugos on
    the Rancho San Antonio_]




                            Rancho Los Felis


North of the Pueblo of Los Angeles and adjoining the Los Angeles River
on the west is the Rancho Los Felis, 6,647 acres.

The rancho was granted in 1843 to Maria Ygnacia Verdugo but it is
evident that she had been occupying the land for some time previous to
that date as on February 17th, 1841, the City of Los Angeles, by the
President of its Common Council, granted to her the "right to use the
water from the river of Our Lady of Angels for cultivating the lands of
Los Felis." At that time there was so much water in the Los Angeles
River in excess of what the pueblo inhabitants could use that the city
felt free to dispose of part of it in this manner.

In 1853 Dona Verdugo, signing by mark, granted to her daughters parts of
the rancho. These deeds recited that they were made for "the welfare and
progress of my daughters." But the daughters failed to progress and soon
sold their respective parts for $1 per acre.

Antonio F. Coronel, famous pioneer of Los Angeles, purchased the rancho
and subsequently he deeded it to James Lick, equally famous pioneer of
San Francisco, by this "more or less" definite description: "Commencing
at a point on Los Angeles River; thence Southerly 3,150 varas, more or
less; thence Westerly 6,200 varas, more or less, to a napalera (prickly
pear patch); thence Northerly 5,000 varas, more or less, to a calera
(lime kiln) and thence Easterly following along the right bank of the
Los Angeles River to the place of beginning 7,100 varas, more or less,
containing more or less one and a half square leagues of land."

In 1882, 4,071 acres were purchased by Colonel Griffith Jenkins Griffith
and in 1884 Colonel Griffith sold back to the City of Los Angeles for
$25,000 the valuable water rights donated 43 years previously.

In the western and southern parts of the rancho development followed
rapidly. The Lick Tract, now part of Hollywood, was platted, then
Ivanhoe and the Edendale district. But most of the mountain and slope
land of the Los Felis Rancho was undeveloped except by hand of nature
until 1898 when Colonel Griffith deeded 3,015 acres of unsurpassed land
to the City of Los Angeles, one of the finest gifts ever presented to a
city--Griffith Park.




                            Rancho San Pedro


Within the boundaries of Rancho San Pedro was Nigger Slough, Rattlesnake
Island and the Salt Flats, and its own name was none too beautiful. But
the Rancho San Pedro overcame all such handicaps and developed into a
favorite child in the family of the Spanish Ranchos.

This rancho, containing 43,119 acres, was one of the tremendously big
Spanish grants made by a Spanish King, who believed the limit of
population which Southern California could ever care for was represented
in the ten Missions, four Pueblos (San Diego, Los Angeles, Santa Barbara
and San Luis Obispo) and the comparatively few Ranchos.

The grant was made to Juan Jose Dominguez of an illustrious family quite
different from the average Spanish family living in California in its
early days. The Dominguez heirs have each in succession adapted
themselves to every change and kept a large part of their rancho intact
to the present day. But much of the land was so strategically located on
the sea, around the harbor and on main lines of boulevards and railroads
between Los Angeles and San Pedro, that it was inevitable that intensive
development should take place on these parts.

On December 22, 1854, the Dominguez heirs sold 2,400 acres at the harbor
to Phineas Banning, B. D. Wilson, John G. Downey and associates for
$20,000, or nearly $10.00 an acre, and on this and adjoining land
Banning founded the town of Wilmington, originally called New San Pedro.
During the Civil War Phineas Banning and B. D. Wilson in a burst of
patriotic enthusiasm donated a large parcel of land in their new town to
the United States government for Drum Barracks, and as such it served a
useful and vital purpose, not only as a supply station and barracks,
but, as well, to hold down anti-Union sentiment. It was easy to donate
the land but it took eight years and a special act of Congress for
Banning and Wilson to get the land back after the close of the War.

Nine miles north of Wilmington but within the same rancho was platted
Comptonville, now Compton, originally planned as a temperance colony.
Ten miles westerly and also in the same rancho, Redondo Reach, platted
in 1889, became a famous pleasure resort. Between these far distant
points have been laid out the towns of Gardena, Moneta, and Torrance. In
addition to these there are now many hundreds of small farms, and
probably the world's largest aggregation of oil tank farms, two or three
airports, an excellent and productive oil field, and there is plenty of
land left in the rancho.

Such is the story of a gift from a King--a Rancho of success.

    [Illustration: _Patio of the Dominguez Home--Rancho San Pedro_]




                           Rancho Santa Anita


The Rancho Santa Anita, covered with oaks and on gentle, sloping ground,
was situated between Pasadena and Monrovia, and includes within its
13,319 acres the cities of Sierra Madre and Arcadia. Its title was
founded on a grant to Hugo Reid made in 1841, confirmed by Mexico in
1845 and by the United States in 1857.

For 20 cents an acre Hugo Reid conveyed the rancho to Henry Dalton, an
Englishman who had for 25 years lived in South America. Subsequently it
passed to William Wolfskill, whose home in the Pueblo of Los Angeles
stood on the present site of the Southern Pacific station. Wolfskill
left the rancho to his son, Lewis, and the younger Wolfskill sold it in
1872 for $85,000 to H. Newmark & Co. Both Harris Newmark of that firm
and Hugo Reid, the first owner of the rancho, have perpetuated their
names in history by their writings of early Los Angeles. Mr. Newmark's
book, "Sixty Years in Southern California," has had a wide circulation.

Three years later for nearly three times the amount paid by H. Newmark
and Co. the rancho was purchased by E. J. Baldwin. Lucky at the mines,
lucky in the markets, lucky with horses and luckiest of all with
land,--no wonder they called him "Lucky" Baldwin.

Baldwin at this time was a San Franciscan and had made millions in the
Ophir mines of Nevada. He built the "fireproof" Baldwin Hotel, the
largest in San Francisco, later destroyed by fire. But the charm of
Rancho Santa Anita soon took Baldwin from his northern home and he moved
into the large ranch house, devoting the balance of his life to the
development of this rancho and the acquiring of others. Upon his death
in 1909, his daughters, Anita M. Baldwin and Clara Baldwin Stocker,
succeeded him in the ownership of Rancho Santa Anita.

Baldwin's greatest love was for horses and he developed a breed of
racing stock which became world-famous. Next to his love for horses he
loved trees and he bordered every road within his rancho with trees and
jealously fostered and guarded them. The towering lines of Eucalyptus
trees along Huntington Drive and Santa Anita Avenue through the Rancho
Santa Anita stand as evidence of the hand of "Lucky" Baldwin--those are
his monuments.




                             Rancho La Brea


For the inhabitants of the pueblo, later the City of Los Angeles, the
Rancho La Brea has always been one of the most useful of the ranchos.
The rancho derived its name from the La Brea Pits where the brea, or
crude oil, oozed to the surface to catch prehistoric animals and
preserve them for many thousands of years and to catch a few stray
cattle in the Spanish days, and also to furnish excellent roofing for
the adobes in the Pueblo of Los Angeles.

The rancho was first granted January 6, 1828, by Jose Antonio Carrillo,
Alcalde of the Pueblo of Los Angeles, to Antonio Jose Rocha, and
comprised one square league of land. Early conveyances, however,
provided that the owners of the rancho, while they were to have complete
title, nevertheless were to allow the inhabitants of the pueblo
unmolested right to take such brea as they might need for the roofs of
their adobes.

Antonio Jose Rocha built an excellent adobe in the Pueblo of Los Angeles
as his pueblo home and this adobe, later known as the Rocha House, was
purchased in 1855 by the Board of Supervisors and the City of Los
Angeles and used jointly as the Jail, the Sheriff's Office, the Court
House and the City Hall.

In 1860 the Rocha heirs sold the Rancho to John Hancock by a deed which
described the property as being a rancho "some 4 or 8 miles West of the
Pueblo of Los Angeles." Cornelius Cole, then United States Senator from
California, received 500 acres of land in this rancho as an attorney fee
for services rendered the Hancock family and on these acres platted
Colegrove, now a part of Hollywood. However, much of the rancho was held
intact by Mr. Hancock and Major Henry Hancock, and later G. Allan
Hancock, and for many years the land with its springs, flowing streams
and gentle ravines provided excellent hunting ground for the people of
the town of Los Angeles. As late as 1892 there appears a conveyance,
executed by Mrs. Hancock, conveying 20 acres of land and reserving for
fifteen years the right to hunt for game. The subsequent platting of the
land following the completion of the Los Angeles-Pacific Interurban
lines soon ruined the land for hunting purposes.

For years the Hancock heirs took immense quantities of oil from the
productive oil field and, as the oil decreased, the development and
growth of the city changed the character of the land and the black sump
holes gave way to green lawns and the tall, ugly (but profitable)
derricks to fine homes, as the Wilshire District, one of the world's
finest residential sections, was built on the Rancho La Brea.

    [Illustration: _Famous La Brea Pits and Ranch House, Now in Hancock
    Park_]




                   Rancho Cienega o'Paso de La Tijera


How differently the Spanish and the Americans viewed their ranches is
quite apparent from the names they gave them. The Americans dubbed their
ranches the "Diamond Bar," the "3 X," the "109," or some other rather
picturesque but meaningless title.

The Spaniards blessed their ranchos by dedicating them to Santa Anita,
San Rafael, Santa Gertrudes, or San Geronimo. They saw the many little
streams of water flowing from the springs on what is now Beverly Hills
and named that Rancho Rodeo de las Aguas--the gathering of the waters.
They loved the big oaks of the district along Ventura Boulevard between
North Hollywood and Girard and named it Rancho El Encino--the oaks. What
the Americans call the Baldwin Hills--they saw naturally formed a pass
resembling scissors and thus was named Rancho Cienega o'Paso de La
Tijera.

In 1843 Governor Manuel Micheltorena granted Rancho Cienega o'Paso de La
Tijera to Vicente Sanchez, friend of the Mexican government, valiant
soldier and good citizen. But he did not live long to enjoy his rancho
and at about the time California became a state his heirs partitioned
his land holdings. Tomas A. Sanchez acquired the rancho--his sisters
taking property on Nigger Alley in the Pueblo of Los Angeles as their
share.

Tomas Sanchez also had a well deserved reputation for extraordinary
bravery and was Sheriff of Los Angeles County from 1860 to 1867, a
period in which crime waves were permanent and the accepted order of the
day.

Gradually the Rancho increased in value. In 1875 Sanchez sold a half
interest for $60,000, later he sold a fourth and finally another Sheriff
sold the remainder. E. J. (Lucky) Baldwin became the owner. Baldwin
found this rancho something of a white elephant. Sheep ranching became
unprofitable and the land was not adapted to orange groves and he knew
nothing of the oil beneath it. But he held the property and when he died
in 1909 his estate listed Rancho Cienega o'Paso de La Tijera as one of
its most valuable possessions. The Baldwin heirs sold large parts of the
rancho, and the Los Angeles Investment Company subdivided tract after
tract within its bounds.

Seemingly no matter how fast this old rancho has been subdivided (and
the growth of Angelus Mesa has been phenomenal) the remaining
unsubdivided part grows in value by leaps and bounds directly contrary
to its diminishing size. Like the estate of "Lucky" Baldwin the estate
of his daughter, Clara Baldwin Stocker, recently deceased, lists as its
most valued possession the remainder of the Rancho Cienega o'Paso de La
Tijera.

    [Illustration: _Hacienda of the Rancho Cienega o'Paso de La
    Tijera--now a Golf Club_]




                   Rancho Ex-Mission de San Fernando


The remark is often heard, "I knew the San Fernando Valley when it was a
wheat field." Thousands of Angelenos recall the founding of Van Nuys and
Owensmouth and the platting of Tract 1000, the largest subdivision in
Los Angeles County. And even the newcomers have seen almost unbelievable
development. But what of the valley before Tract 1000; what before the
wheat?

When the Fathers of the Mission of San Fernando completed their Mission
and looked out through its arches their vision could not include land
not theirs. The grant to the Mission described 121,000 acres extending
from mountains to mountains on all sides of the valley, and named the
rancho Mission de San Fernando, and as such it prospered.

Spain encouraged and protected the Missions of California and granted to
them great tracts of land--Mexico plundered and destroyed the Missions
and seized their lands. Among these Mission lands seized by the Mexican
government was the prize of them all, the Mission de San Fernando. For
years chaos reigned at the Mission. The government drove off many of the
Indians, others left and the herds of cattle became legitimate prey
alike for "Gentlemen of Mexico" and Mexican bandits not claiming the
distinction.

In 1846 armed invasion of California was commenced by the Americans.
Governor Pio Pico in a blaze of oratory declared that at any cost the
"Department of California" must be retained as property of Mexico
forever and asked for authority to sell Rancho Mission de San Fernando,
then known as Rancho Ex-Mission, for funds with which to equip an army.
In this emergency the San Fernando Valley was sold as a land bargain
never again equaled, $14,000 for the entire rancho--approximately eleven
cents an acre. Eulogio de Celis purchased the rancho at that figure and
not only did he get a Mexican land bargain but he at once stocked his
big rancho and before the war was over sold horses and cattle to both
sides.

In 1854 General Andres Pico, brother of the Ex-Governor, purchased a
half interest in the rancho for $15,000 and in 1862 this interest passed
to Pio Pico himself. The land holdings of the last Mexican Governor were
equal to an empire. At one time he owned Rancho Paso de Bartolo, his
interest in Rancho San Fernando, his home place called Ranchito, near
Whittier in this County, and Ranchos Las Flores and Santa Margarita,
both tremendous ranches in San Diego County. In addition to his ranchos
he owned a home on the plaza in the Pueblo of Los Angeles and
considerable additional pueblo land in Los Angeles and San Diego. He
built the celebrated Pico House, yet standing, facing the plaza in Los
Angeles. His life was crowned with success at every turn. Under Mexico
he was California's leading citizen. Under the United States the ranchos
he owned and the honors he had held gave him a prestige accorded few
men.

For $2.00 an acre the Rancho Ex-Mission de San Fernando was sold by Pico
and the son of de Celis to Isaac Lankershim, Charles Maclay, I. N. Van
Nuys and B. F. Porter. Under the ownership of these four men Rancho San
Fernando became a great wheat field and four great fortunes were made
for its owners.

While Pio Pico, who once counted his acres in hundreds of thousands,
spent his last days in abject poverty--his ranchos, his city property,
his hotel and his home all sold for a mortgage--nothing was
left--nothing but his medals of honor and his memories of the past.

    [Illustration: _Mission de San Fernando_]




                             Rancho Tajauta


Rancho Tajauta, sometimes called Rancho Los Cuervos, was like a dwarf
among giants. It could have fitted into one corner of its neighbor, the
Rancho San Pedro, or been lost in the San Fernando, and yet it was no
small plot of ground. It extended from what is now Manchester Avenue on
the north to the north boundary of the Rancho San Pedro on the south and
between Central Avenue on the west and the Los Angeles River and Rancho
San Antonio on the east.

At the height of the cattle days there was only one house on the Rancho
Tajauta, a two-room adobe. Today it is estimated over 20,000 people live
within its boundaries, which include most of Watts and adjoining area in
the southerly part of Los Angeles--and a fourth of the rancho is yet to
be subdivided. The size of the rancho, however, was no criterion to the
number of its owners and changes in its title. Before California became
a state, its original owner, Anastacio Abila, died and left so many
heirs that it was necessary to divide the estate into seventieth parts
to properly partition it. These small interests in the rancho were then
traded in like second-hand Fords are today.

Phineas Banning, passing the rancho in his stage-coach and eyeing it
carefully for bandits, noticed the soil was excellent, visioned the
railroads that would cross it and bought many small interests. O. W.
Childs, famous for the water ditch which he constructed and for which he
received most of downtown Los Angeles in payment, likewise bought a few
interests. So did Don Mateo Keller, who owned the Rancho Malibu and
Francis Mellus of Mellus Row. And among the owners was the entire legal
fraternity of that day--A. B. Chapman, Andrew Glassell, A. Brunson and
R. M. Widney, all famous names in Southern California history. A $50
gold slug, the common medium for exchange in those days when small
change was unknown, often bought an interest. Enrique Abila, one of the
heirs of Anastacio Abila, in addition to his own holdings, gradually
acquired many of the interests of the other heirs. He made his home on
the rancho and lived to see the city reach and surround him.

A little rancho was Rancho Tajauta, but a very active one.




                             Rancho Repetto


Rancho Repetto, as such, was not an original Spanish or Mexican rancho,
yet in character and size it was just as a Spanish or Mexican rancho
would be. Its history, although covering a period much shorter than the
life of the Spanish grant, is full of the romance of the ranchos of the
Dons.

The rancho derived its name from Alessandro Repetto, later known as
Alexander Repetto, who purchased its five thousand acres shortly after
the Civil War. Some of the land had been found by the United States Land
Commission to belong to the Rancho San Antonio and this Repetto
purchased from the Lugos. Some of the land he obtained from the
government and forty acres came through state patent.

Toward its west boundary ran a road recently widened and paved by the
County of Los Angeles. One of the deeds to Repetto refers to this as
"the Road used by the horsemen coming from the rancho of Juan Matias
Sanchez" (originally Mission land of San Gabriel). Later the road was
called Portesuelo de la Rosa de Castella, and still later it was
officially changed to Monterey Pass. It is commonly called Coyote Pass.

In 1885 Alexander Repetto died leaving as his heir Antonio Repetto, a
brother who lived in Italy. The heir preferred Italy to California and
came here only long enough to collect his inheritance, sell the rancho
and return home. Harris Newmark, John D. Bicknell, Kaspare Cohn, who
founded the Union Bank & Trust Co., Stephen M. White, once United States
Senator from California, and whose figure in bronze stands in front of
the Los Angeles County Court House, and I. W. Hellman purchased the
rancho for $60,000--about $12.00 an acre.

Out of the Harris Newmark and Kaspare Cohn holdings in Rancho Repetto
was platted Montebello, originally called the Town of Newmark. I. W.
Hellman, whose interest in the rancho equalled 1,500 acres, chose his
land in the northwestern part of the rancho and with that foresight
which made him the foremost banker in Los Angeles when he lived here and
the foremost banker of San Francisco when he removed there he held the
land for the future. This remainder of Rancho Repetto though closer to
Broadway than Hollywood has almost to this day remained just as it was
when it was the property of Alessandro Repetto, while to the south was a
view of intensive development, as Los Angeles industrially spread
eastward, and to the north was another view of intensive development as
Pasadena and Alhambra became cities.

Recently the last of Rancho Repetto has given up its aloofness. Atlantic
Boulevard has been cut through from north to south and Beverly Boulevard
is to cross it from west to east. The Hellman heirs have conveyed a
large part of it and the J. B. Ransom Corporation has announced an
immediate subdivision program. The final chapter in the history of
Rancho Repetto is being written.

    [Illustration: _Early Ranch House--American Period_]




                   Rancho San Vicente y Santa Monica


Most of the development on the ranchos of Southern California has just
happened--they, like Topsy, just grew. But not so the Rancho San Vicente
y Santa Monica. A careful plan, expenditure of great wealth and a
determination of purpose unequaled all sought to make a great seaport of
Santa Monica--and no city could have grown more contrary to the efforts
to guide it than has Santa Monica.

The rancho was granted December 20th, 1839, by Governor Juan B. Alvarado
to Francisco Sepulveda, officer of the Mexican army, and comprised
31,000 acres of mountain, mesa and ocean shore land. In the following
thirty-three years many changes came over California. The rule of the
United States supplanted the ruin of Mexico, California became a state
and Los Angeles a city. The wool of the lazy sheep became more
profitable than the hides of cattle.

In 1872 the heirs of Sepulveda, anxious to divide their inheritance and
believing that Rancho San Vicente y Santa Monica had reached the peak of
its value, sold the same for less than $2.00 an acre to Colonel Robert
S. Baker, prominent wool grower of Kern County. Colonel Baker stocked
the rancho with herds of sheep and shortly thereafter sold an undivided
three-fourths interest in his property to Senator John P. Jones of
Nevada. Jones and Baker then conceived the plan of a great harbor at
Santa Monica and a harbor city on the rancho; the fortunes of both these
men were thrown into the project and Santa Monica was platted.

The Los Angeles & Independence Railroad with its terminus at the new
city and running to Los Angeles was built and operated. It had been
planned to extend the railroad into the mining district of Inyo County
and part of its name was derived from Independence, the county seat of
Inyo County. However, the line was never built beyond Los Angeles. In
connection with the railroad a large warehouse was built in Los Angeles,
and a long wharf at Santa Monica. Every preparation was made for giant
ships of the sea--ships which were never to come.

In 1886 the land boom which descended on Los Angeles and vicinity found
Santa Monica well prepared to receive it. Colonel Baker and Senator
Jones had hundreds of unsold lots and those previously sold when the
harbor city was budding were ready for resale. The Arcadia Hotel, a
handsome tourist resort located on the bluff, was built by Colonel Baker
and named for his wife, Arcadia Bandini de Baker, who formerly had been
Mrs. Abel Stearns. Mrs. de Baker, child of an illustrious Spanish
family, was famed for her beauty, and, as wife of Don Abel Stearns,
commanded an outstanding social position in Los Angeles. Upon Don Abel's
death she inherited all of his ranchos. Shortly after the boom the
Estate of Colonel Baker, Senator Jones and the Santa Monica Land & Water
Company conveyed 300 acres of land along the east boundary of the rancho
to the United States and on this and adjoining land the Soldiers' Home
was built.

Then another effort was made to create a harbor at Santa Monica--this
time led by Collis P. Huntington with the wealth of the Southern Pacific
Railroad behind him. This last great attempt was given up only when
threshed out on the floor of the United States Senate and the United
States had decided that the Harbor should be at San Pedro. Perhaps it
was the guiding hand of destiny that kept Santa Monica unspoiled as a
residence city.

    [Illustration: "_The wool of the lazy sheep became more profitable
    than the hides of cattle_"]




                        Rancho Los Palos Verdes


Rancho Los Palos Verdes has been the scene of some of the earliest as
well as the latest development in Los Angeles County. For more than
thirty years before Willmore platted Willmore City, later called Long
Beach, and before Jones and Baker laid out their harbor city of Santa
Monica there had been a thriving settlement at the port of San Pedro in
the Rancho Los Palos Verdes.

The town of San Pedro, later city of San Pedro, and now part of the city
of Los Angeles, was built around that port settlement and almost the
entire district was carved not out of the Rancho San Pedro, as is
generally understood, but out of the Rancho Los Palos Verdes.

The rancho was granted June 3rd, 1846, by Governor Pio Pico to Jose
Loreto Sepulveda and Juan Sepulveda, brothers, this grant being a
ratification of a previous one made in 1827. It extended from Redondo to
Wilmington and bounded on the north and northeast by Rancho San Pedro
and on the southeast, south and west by the Pacific Ocean, comprising
31,629 acres. Pico, however, reserved a plat of land along the beach,
500 varas square, for the use of the "Superior Government of the Mexican
Nation."

With the death of the original grantees and the passing of the ranch
title to their many heirs, Rancho Los Palos Verdes passed into a period
of extensive litigation and had it not been of such tremendous size and
of such constantly increasing value in all probability it would soon
have belonged to the attorneys. From 1865 to 1880, seventy-eight
lawsuits were instituted involving the rancho. The ranch title itself
was not confirmed until 1880. All of the heirs and their successors in
interest held undivided parts of the rancho and six partition suits were
filed before the property was divided according to the respective
ownerships. There were also a dozen suits to eject squatters, several
divorces among the owners, three condemnation suits by the United States
government for land for the lighthouse at Point Firmin, an action to fix
the boundaries of Timms Landing at the port, two foreclosure actions and
several complaints for possession.

The commissioners in one of the partition suits platted the town of San
Pedro, composed of ninety-eight blocks and this plat filled the two-fold
purpose of making an easy method of dividing the property among the
partitioners and of providing for the growth of the settlement at the
harbor.

In the years that followed the east part of the rancho progressed
rapidly while thousands of acres in the hills from Point Firmin to
Redondo were retained in a few ownerships and the land used only for
farming. Few people ever saw the rugged coast of Palos Verdes, although
Malaga Cove, Rocky Point, Point Vicente, Long Point, Portuguese Point
and Portuguese Bend were all known to fishermen.

In 1913 for a consideration of nearly $2,000,000 the western part of the
rancho was conveyed to Jay Lawler and Frank A. Vanderlip, then of New
York. Palos Verdes Estates was conceived in 1922 to develop this part of
the property and to make a world-famous community of homes. The rancho
of the Sepulvedas is a perfect setting for this effort.

    [Illustration: _Verdugo Ranch House, Rancho San Rafael--the First of
    the Grants_]




                      Mission San Gabriel Arcangel


In all California no land has been the scene of such triumphs and
defeats, such prosperity and poverty, such alternating fair fortune and
dire misfortune as the lands of the Mission San Gabriel Arcangel.

The Mission San Gabriel was founded September 4th, 1771, by Father
Junipero Serra and land set apart for the Mission included nearly the
entire San Gabriel Valley. There was the usual struggle to establish the
Mission and convert the Indians. The first Mission buildings were
destroyed and the old mill--yet standing--built at a great expenditure
of toil and thought was a total failure. But within a few short years
after the founding Mission San Gabriel took its place as the Queen of
the Missions and the most prosperous of all.

The title of the Mission Fathers to the lands had not been confirmed by
written grant from Carlos III, King of Spain, and the governors of
California under Mexico took advantage of this to grant ranchos within
the valley borders. In the northwest part Rancho San Pascual was granted
to become the princely estate of Don Manuel Garfias and later the sites
of Pasadena and South Pasadena. Farther east Rancho Santa Anita was
created and eventually became the property of E. J. (Lucky) Baldwin.
Beyond that rancho were Ranchos San Francisquito and La Puente. Along
the south hills of the valley Ranchos La Merced, Potrero Grande and
Potrero Chico were granted. By the severing of such large tracts of land
the property of the Mission San Gabriel diminished from tens of
thousands of acres to thousands of acres and then to hundreds.

In 1846 Governor Pico asked permission of his government to lease the
remaining land of the Mission San Gabriel "to prevent the total ruin of
the Mission." No lessee could be found to take the land under this act
and on June 18th, 1846, Pio Pico made the final grant of all the
remaining Mission lands to Julian Workman and Hugo Reid. The United
States government, however, refused to confirm this last minute disposal
of the Mission land and declared the property public land of the United
States, first setting aside to Bishop Alemany 190 acres surrounding the
Mission buildings.

The public land was quickly taken up by many settlers, who were eager to
acquire homesteads in a country almost exclusively made up of giant
ranchos. Subsequently B. D. Wilson and J. De Barth Shorb acquired much
of this land and platted the present prosperous and beautiful city of
Alhambra. San Gabriel and Monterey Park also have been built on land
originally within the Mission boundaries.

The 190 acres set aside for the Mission Church was the largest parcel of
land received by any one Mission out of the land it had formerly held.
At the height of the Mission glory in all a million and a half acres
were under the control of the Padres. When California became the
property of the United States twenty missions other than San Gabriel
held from four to seventy-six acres each--a total for all the chain of
less than 800 acres. Eight hundred acres out of the original million and
a half.

    [Illustration: _Mission San Gabriel Arcangel_]




                    Rancho San Jose de Buenos Ayres


Rancho San Jose de Buenos Ayres was not in South America, as its name
might indicate, but was an important rancho of Southern California. The
rancho was granted by Manuel Micheltorena, Governor of the Californias,
February 24, 1843, to Maximo Alanis and comprised 4,438 acres. Don
Alanis died shortly after he received the grant and his heirs conveyed
the rancho to Dr. Wilson W. Jones and Wm. T. B. Sanford, the former, one
of Los Angeles' first doctors and the latter, an early Los Angeles
postmaster.

But the doctor knew little about ranching and in 1852 he was glad to
sell his half interest in the rancho to Don Benito Wilson for $662.75,
or at the rate of 35 cents an acre. Don Benito's interests were
extensive and widely separated. Jointly with Dr. Griffin he operated
Rancho San Pascual northeast of the Pueblo of Los Angeles. Jointly with
Phineas Banning he founded and developed the city of Wilmington at the
port of San Pedro, and west of the pueblo, halfway to the ocean, with
Sanford, the Postmaster, he raised cattle on Rancho San Jose de Buenos
Ayres. Between supervising trips to his ranchos and to the harbor he
found time to maintain a home in the Pueblo of Los Angeles--so large
that after he moved it was used for an orphan asylum--buy much city
property, ship wine to San Francisco and foster the development of the
orange.

In 1858 B. D. Wilson bought the interest of Sanford in this and other
property for $16,000 and subsequently sold the rancho. In 1884 John
Wolfskill of the prominent family of that name purchased the rancho for
$40,000. The purchase by Wolfskill was very timely as the completion of
the Santa Fe Railroad two years later sent land prices skyrocketing and
in 1887 he entered into an agreement to dispose of the rancho for
$438,700, or more than ten times what he had paid for the land in 1884.

The Los Angeles and Santa Monica Land and Water Company was organized to
take over the land at that figure. This company built a railroad through
the property and platted the town of Sunset. But few lots were sold,
however, and in 1891 the Los Angeles and Santa Monica Land and Water
Company quitclaimed the land back to Wolfskill and the townsite was
restored to acreage. Then for many years the rancho was used only for
farming, although its neighbor on the east, the Rancho Rodeo de Las
Aguas, was subdivided into Beverly Hills, and on the west Santa Monica
grew into a thriving city.

In 1919 Arthur Letts, Sr., Merchant Prince of Los Angeles, founder of
the Broadway Department Store, bought the rancho for an investment.
Since that time Westwood, Holmby Hills (named after Holmby, England, Mr.
Letts' birthplace) and Westwood Village have all been platted on parts
of the rancho. The moving-picture industry has expanded into the
property and several of the largest studios are located there. Now the
University of California at Los Angeles is being built on the rancho,
and already opened as one of the greatest institutions of learning.

B. D. Wilson, John Wolfskill and Arthur Letts all profited by their
farsightedness, but none had the vision and none could foresee Rancho
San Jose de Buenos Ayres as it is today.




                              _CONCLUSION_


The priceless, romantic history of early California is everywhere being
more and more appreciated. It evidences itself in the names of our
cities, in our landmarks which are at last being preserved and even in
our architecture.

If "The Romance of the Ranchos" can add its bit to perpetuating this
glorious chapter in California history the writer will feel the time and
effort well worthwhile.

    [Illustration: _Title Insurance Building_    _Spring Street between
    Fourth and Fifth_]




                   Title Insurance and Trust Company


              California's Largest Title Insurance Company

Title Insurance and Trust Company is the oldest and largest Title
Insurance Company west of Chicago. It is the oldest Trust Company in the
Pacific Southwest. It has been serving the people of Los Angeles County
for thirty-eight years.

Although founded in 1893, the Company's records are much older than
that, for they cover the period from the early Spanish days to the
present time. The history of every parcel of land in the County is
recorded in the books and maps of the Company's title plant, and in its
old records safely stored in its archives vault.

This great store house of real estate information, called the title
plant, is the Company's most valuable possession. It is from these
invaluable records, many of which are originals, that the material used
in compiling "The Romance of the Ranchos" has been derived.


This real estate information has been indexed and classified so that the
Company's examiners may find the necessary information in the least
possible time. Millions of dollars have been expended in creating this
great plant which is not surpassed by any in the nation.

Great as has been the cost and the amount of labor expended--this title
plant is not finished--it never will be finished.

Each business day of the year 1500 to 2000 documents affecting Los
Angeles County real estate titles are filed in the Recorder's office and
by 11:30 p.m.--on the day of filing--all have been "posted" on the
Company's books.

Much of the "posting," much of the map making in the title plant has no
connection with present orders. Some of the work done today may be used
tomorrow, some of it may not be used for many years. An important part
of the personnel in this great business machine, which we call the title
plant, is engaged solely in the preparation for future work.

But when the call comes, the plant is ready.


This plant was created to give the people of Los Angeles County accurate
service in the searching and insuring of titles. It serves
owner--buyer--lender--borrower.

From this plant, the Company issues policies of title insurance
protecting the ownership of real property. Step by step, these policies,
through a series of improvements extending throughout the entire history
of the Company, have been developed into the highest type of title
protection offered anywhere.


                                ESCROWS

The modern escrow system was originated by this Company. It was designed
to make real estate transactions convenient and safe. A highly trained
personnel and complete and convenient facilities provide efficient
service to buyer and to seller.


                                 TRUSTS

The Company acts as executor and trustee under wills, as administrator
of estates, and in all other trust capacities.

It offers at a nominal cost an "all-inclusive" declaration of trust,
which is exceedingly flexible. Life insurance policies may be placed in
this trust, thereby protecting the beneficiary from loss, and to this
trust from time to time there may be added real or personal property.

The Company has had long experience in the management of estates. If you
name the Company as executor under your will, you will be assured that
your beneficiaries will receive considerate and courteous attention and
that your trust estate will be wisely managed and profitably invested.

    [Illustration: _Trust Department_]

  [Illustration: THE OLD SPANISH AND MEXICAN RANCHOS _of_ Los Angeles
                                 County
                          High-resolution Map]




                          Transcriber's Notes


--Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

--Corrected a few palpable typographical errors.

--In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of Project Gutenberg's The Romance of the Ranchos, by E. Palmer Conner

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROMANCE OF THE RANCHOS ***

***** This file should be named 53500.txt or 53500.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/5/0/53500/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, MFR and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

