                          Rescue the Perishing


This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license. If you are not located in the United
States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you are
located before using this ebook.



Title: Rescue the Perishing
Author: Fred R. Seibert
Release Date: December 26, 2016 [EBook #53811]
Language: English
Character set encoding: US-ASCII


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RESCUE THE PERISHING ***




Produced by Peter G. Nystrom.

This ebook was produced from scanned images of a personal copy of the
book.




                               _*RESCUE*_

                                _*THE*_

                             _*PERISHING*_

     _------------------------------------------------------------_

                       _PERSONAL WORK MADE EASY._

     _------------------------------------------------------------_

                   _That ye may KNOW how ye ought to_

                _ANSWER every man ---- Colossians 4:6._

     _------------------------------------------------------------_

                      _SUGGESTIVE NOTES AND HINTS_

                 _FOR BEGINNERS IN THE CHRISTIAN LIFE._

     _------------------------------------------------------------_

    _And take the helmet of Salvation, and the sword of the Spirit,_

            _which is the word of God. ---- Ephesians 6:17._

     _------------------------------------------------------------_

                             _ARRANGED BY_

                          _"FRED" R. SEIBERT_

     _------------------------------------------------------------_

                             _PUBLISHED BY_

                 _*THE RODEHEAVER, HALL-MACK COMPANY*_

                        _*WINONA LAKE, INDIANA*_

                              _Price, 40c_




            _Copyright 1921, by "Fred" R. Seibert, U. S. A._

              _Entered at Stationers' Hall, London, Eng._




                               _PREFACE_


   _This Book is the result of a life time of research and practical
        effort, and has been forged on the anvil of experience._




                          SUNSHINE AND SMILES

                           "FRED" R. SEIBERT

                      A SOUL WINNER ALL FOR JESUS




                        _May my Motto be yours:_

 *Nothing of myself: everything in Christ: without Him nothing with Him
                              All Things.*




                                Contents


    PERSONAL WORK MADE EASY.
      Assurance. *HOW you may KNOW you are saved.*
      Backslider. *God's WARNING to the backslider*
      Backslider. *How he MAY RETURN to the Lord.*
      Baptism. *COMMANDED by God PRACTICED by Christ and others.*
      Baptism. *It FOLLOWS salvation. Baptized, because SAVED*
      Business. *I will be HINDERED in making money.*
      Christian Living. *Those TRYING to be Christians.*
      Christian Living. *STRENGTH for holding out.*
      Christian Living. *How to GROW In grace.*
      Christian Living. *Results of Keeping CLOSE to CHRIST.*
      Christian Living. *Results FOLLOWING repentance and faith.*
      Church, The- *Must I JOIN to be a Christian?*
      Confession. *Confusing Christ PUBLICLY.*
      Consecration.
      Christ. *His Deity.*
      Christian Science. *Its NON-CHRISTIAN character.*
      Christian Science. *God warns AGAINST It.*
      Conversions. *Instantaneous. Bible EXAMPLES.*
      Doubter. *One who is HONEST.*
      Excuses. *I am a MEMBER of the church.*
      Excuses. *I am GOOD ENOUGH.*
      Excuses. *I am NOT very bad.*
      Excuses. *I am NOT GOOD ENOUGH to be a Christian.*
      Excuses. *I am TOO GREAT a sinner.*
      Excuses. *Not now.*
      Excuses. *There are Church members NO BETTER THAN I!*
      Excuses. *My companions, Keep me from Christ.*
      Excuses. *I can not give up my EVIL WAYS!*
      Excuses. *There is TOO MUCH to give up.*
      Excuses. *I CAN NOT surrender all.*
      Excuses. *The christian life Is TOO HARD.*
      Excuses. *I have tried and FAILED.*
      Excuses. *I have TRIED and FAILED.*
      Excuses. *Can't HOLD OUT! God's KEEPING power.*
      Excuses. *I have no FEELING.*
      Excuses. *I am not CONCERNED.*
      Excuses. *The INDIFFERENT neglecting his soul.*
      Excuses. *Those who KNOW NOT the way.*
      Excuses. *I don't know WHAT or HOW to believe.*
      Excuses. *I can't understand the Bible.*
      Excuses. *I can't see my way CLEAR.*
      Excuses. *My heart is TOO HARD.*
      Excuses. *I am TOO YOUNG.*
      Excuses. *I believe EVERY ONE will be SAVED.*
      Excuses. *It IS TOO LATE for me to be saved.*
      Excuses. *DON'T TALK to me, or I will leave.*
      Formalists. *One who trusts in FORMS and CEREMONIES.*
      Giving. *(Systematically) ONE TENTH of your income.*
      Hell. *God In UNJUST AND CRUEL to damn any one.*
      Hell. *A real PLACE.*
      Hell. *CONDITION of the lost.*
      Holiness. *Christ with In you SANCTIFYING the life.*
      Holy Spirit. *His WORK among men.*
      Hypocrites. *Too many IN THE CHURCH.*
      Love. *For your NEIGHBOR.*
      Moralist. *Who trusts in his SELF RIGHTEOUSNESS.*
      Moralist. *Who trusts In his GOOD WORKS to save.*
      Personal Work. *Its Great IMPORTANCE.*
      Personal Work. *QUALIFICATIONS needed.*
      Personal Work. *The "soul-winner's" prayer.*
      Personal work. *Help in COTTAGE meetings.*
      Personal Work. *Use of the "PRAYER LIST" Card.*
      Personal Work.
      Personal Work. *HINTS and SUGGESTIONS.*
      Personal Work. *Suggestive Scriptures.*
      Personal Work. *Fruit promised to faithful effort.*
      Personal Work. *FRUIT-BEARERS Chapter.*
      Personal Work. *For those who feel Too Weak and are Fearful.*
      Personal Work. *A word to the unwilling.*
      Pleasures. *Those who want to LIVE FOR THE WORLD.*
      Prayer. *HEARD and ANSWERED by God.*
      Prayer. *VICTORY through prayer.*
      Prayer. *REGULAR seasons for prayer.*
      Prayer. *CONDITIONS In answer to prayer.*
      Regeneration, or the New Birth. *RESULTS of Regeneration.*
      Repentance. *A requisite for Salvation, what does it mean?*
      Revival, The. *How to make it a success.*
      Revival, The. *What to bring to It.*
      Ridicule and Persecution. *My friends will LAUGH at me.*
      Ridicule and Persecution. *Encouragement given us.*
      Sabbath and Sunday. *HOW a Christian should HALLOW IT.*
      Salvation. *To WHOM offered? "Whosoever will!"*
      Salvation. *Offered to the MOST sinful.*
      Salvation. *Saved alone by FAITH, Lost through UNBELIEF.*
      Salvation. *What must I do to be saved?*
      Salvation. *Proofs that we are saved.*
      Scriptures, The. *Given by inspiration.*
      Scriptures, The. *They supply every need.*
      Scriptures, The. *God's promises FOR YOU.*
      Scriptures, The. *For the Jews.*
      Scriptures, The. *Given to INSTRUCT the Church-member.*
      Scriptures, The. *HOW TO READ them HELPFUL thoughts.*
      Scriptures, The. *Importance of Bible study.*
      Scriptures, The. *How to study them.*
      Scriptures, The. *How to memorize?*
      Scriptures, The. *The word of God our TESTIMONY.*
      Skeptic. *The HONEST enquirer, though skeptical.*
      Spiritualism Fortune Telling. *God WARNS against It.*
      Temperance. *God's WARNING against INTEMPERANCE.*
      Temptation. *How to gain the VICTORY.*
      Unpardonable Sin.
      Unforgiveness. *For those who will not forgive.*
      Worldly Amusements. *"I see no HARM in them"*
      Young Converts. *What they should do.*
    GENERAL INDEX
    INDEX FOR CHRISTIANS
    INDEX FOR THE UNSAVED
    Songs:
      The Bible Railway.
      Consecration.
      A Man May Be Down But He Never is Out.




                        PERSONAL WORK MADE EASY.



                               Assurance.
                   *HOW you may KNOW you are saved.*


You may *know* you are saved, because God *says so* in His Word.

*THESE things have I written* unto you that believe on the name of the
Son of God, *that ye may know* (not hope, or guess) that ye *have* (not
are going to have) eternal life."

                                                          _I John 5:13._

BUT as many as *received Him* (Christ) to *them gave* he *power* to
*become the sons* of *God*, even to them that *believe on his name*.

                                                            _John 1:12._

I KNOW whom I have believed and am persuaded that *he is able to keep*
that which I have committed unto him against that day.

                                                      _II Timothy 1:12._

VERILY, *verily*, I say unto you, He that *heareth my word and believeth
on Him* that sent me HATH everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation (judgment) but is *passed from death unto life*.

                                                            _John 5:24._

A great many people think it is presumption for them to say they *know*
they are saved--that they can only "hope for the best, and will have to
wait until the judgment before they know." Paul did not say to the
jailer: "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and *perhaps* you will be
saved, or you will have a *good chance* of being saved, or you may
*hope* to be saved." No, but "thou *shalt* be saved."

                                                           _Acts 16:31._

VERILY, verily, I say unto you, he that *believeth on me* HATH
everlasting life.

                                                            _John 6:47._

He that believeth on the Son *hath* (not perhaps will have) everlasting
life.

                                                            _John 3:36._

HE that hath the Son *hath* life.

                                                          _I John 5:12._

The Holy Spirit can not give you any happy feelings until you *rest
fully upon God's Word.*

If you have *received God's gift* (Jesus), you have God's *word* for it
that you *have life*. *The life is in His Son*.  Believe this and you
will *know it*. Confess Jesus as your Savior and you will have the
witness of the Spirit.

THE Spirit itself *beareth witness* with our spirit that we *are* the
children of God.

                                                          _Romans 8:16._

HE that believeth on the Son of God hath the *witness (record)* in
*himself*: he that believeth not God hath made him a liar; because he
believeth not the record that God gave of his Son. And this is the
record, that God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in his
Son. He that hath the Son *hath life*; and he that hath not the Son of
God hath not life.

                                                    _I John 5:10,11,12._

"Put that in black and white," says the merchant when a good offer is
made to him. God has put his offer in black and white--"*These things
are written*." Read: I John 5:13.

Do you say, I don't feel it? Feeling is not the evidence, or proof for
you to trust. Your feelings may change like the wind, but God's word
never changes. He says: "Heaven and earth shall pass away but My words
*shall not* pass away."

                                                        _Matthew 24:35._

Which would you rather trust, God's *unchanging* Word, or your
*everchanging* feelings? When God says a thing, it is so.

If you want this evidence *you must believe God's word*. If you do not,
you are making God a liar, and this will prevent the Spirit from working
in you.

He that believeth not God hath *made Him a liar*; because he *believeth
not the record* that God gave of His Son. And this *is the record*, that
God *hath given* to us eternal life.

                                                       _I John 5:10-11._

Illustration: Luke 1:10



                              Backslider.
                   *God's WARNING to the backslider*


NOW the just shall live by faith: but *if any man draw back*, my soul
shall have *no pleasure in him*.

                                                        _Hebrews 10:38._

FOR it had *been better* for them *not to have known* the way of
righteousness, than, after they have known it, *to turn from the holy
commandment* delivered unto them.

                                                        _II Peter 2:21._

THEREFORE to him that *knoweth* to do good, and *doeth it not*, to him
*it is sin*.

                                                           _James 4:17._

TAKE heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in *departing from the living God*.

                                                         _Hebrews 3:12._

I HAVE overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and
ye were *as a firebrand plucked out of the burning:* yet *have ye not
returned* unto me, saith the Lord.

Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel: and because I will do this
unto thee, *prepare to meet thy God*, O Israel.

                                                         _Amos 4:11-12._

SO then because thou art *lukewarm*, and neither cold nor hot, I will
*spew thee out of my mouth*.

                                                      _Revelation 3:16._

If you are cold and indifferent, and fallen into sin, you will never be
truly happy, or have peace in your soul, until you *confess your sins*
and return to the Lord, because God says,

THE backslider in heart shall be *filled with his own ways*.

                                                       _Proverbs 14:14._

God says though man's ways are not His ways, (Isaiah 55:8) there is
*hope* for the backslider--Think of the story of the Prodigal Son and
how the Father *welcomed his boy home!*

BUT *when he was yet a great way off*, his father *saw him*, and had
*compassion*, and ran, and fell on his neck, and *kissed him*.

                                                           _Luke 15:20._

Read the next page



                              Backslider.
                    *How he MAY RETURN to the Lord.*


*1st. Submit to God*. *He will forgive*.

GO and proclaim these words toward the north, and say, *Return, thou
backsliding Israel, saith the* Lord; and I will not cause mine anger to
fall upon you: for I am merciful, saith the Lord, and I will not keep
anger for ever. *Only acknowledge thine iniquity*, that thou hast
transgressed against the Lord thy God, and hast scattered thy ways to
the strangers under every green tree, and ye have not obeyed my voice,
saith the Lord, *Turn, O backsliding children, saith the* Lord; *for I
am married unto you*.

                                                     _Jeremiah 3:12-14._

*I WILL heal their backsliding*, I will love them freely: for mine anger
is turned away from him.

                                                           _Hosea 14:4._

*2nd. Confess to God.*

I ACKNOWLEDGED *my sin unto* thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. I
said, *I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord*; and thou
forgavest the iniquity of my sin.

                                                          _Psalms 32:5._

IF we *confess* our *sins*, He is *faithful* and *just* to forgive us
our *sins*, and to *cleanse* us from all *unrighteousness*.

                                                           _I John 1:9._

*3rd. Turn to God.*

THEREFORE *turn thou to thy God*: keep mercy and judgment, and wait on
*thy* God continually.

                                                           _Hosea 12:6._

IF *thou return to the Almighty, thou shalt be built up*, thou shalt put
away iniquity far from thy tabernacles.

                                                            _Job 22:23._

AND He is the *propitiation* for our sins; and not for ours only, but
also for the sins of the *whole world*.

                                                            _I John 2:2_

Some say they are backsliders, but are *not*, for they have never *slid
forward*.



                                Baptism.
           *COMMANDED by God PRACTICED by Christ and others.*


The Bible plainly teaches that every believer *should confess Christ in
baptism*.

GO ye therefore, and make disciples of all the nations, *baptizing them*
into the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.

                                                   _Matthew 28:19, R.V._

HE that believeth and is *baptized* shall be saved; but he that
disbelieveth shall be condemned.

                                                      _Mark 16:16, R.V._

AND Peter said up to them, Repent ye, and be *baptized* every one of you
in the name of Jesus Christ unto the remission of your sins.

                                                       _Acts 2:38, R.V._

AND there went out unto him all the land of Judaea, and they of
Jerusalem and were *baptized of him*, in the river of Jordan confessing
their sins.

                                                             _Mark 1:5._

*JESUS was baptized*.

THEN cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John, *to be baptized* of
him. . . . And Jesus, *when he was baptized*, went up straightway out of
the water: and, lo the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the
Spirit of God descending like a dove and lighting upon him.

                                                     _Matthew 3:13, 16._

*PAUL was baptized.*

AND immediately there fell from his eyes as it had been scales; and he
received sight forthwith, and arose, and was *baptized*.

                                                            _Acts 9:18._

*The EUNUCH was baptized*.

THE eunuch said, See, here is water: what doth hinder me to be
*baptized*?  . . .  And he commanded the chariot to stand still: and
they went down both into the water, both Philip and the eunuch; and he
*baptized him*.

                                                        _Acts 8:36, 38._

*The JAILOR was baptized*.

AND he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes;
and *was baptized*, he and all his, straightway.

                                                           _Acts 16:33._



                                Baptism.
            *It FOLLOWS salvation. Baptized, because SAVED*


There are two extremes taken by people in the matter of baptism, one is
to *reject* it entirely, and the other is to magnify it beyond it's
proper significance, and make it *necessary to salvation*.

We are to be baptized, not to *help save ourselves*, but, because
*Christ has already saved us* through our acceptance of His sacrifice on
the cross. We go forward in baptism in obedience to God's command, thus
openly confessing Him before the world by this act. Our baptism will
avail us nothing, unless *our heart is right toward God*.

Philip told the Eunuch that *he could be baptized* if he *believed with
all his heart*.

AND Philip said, If thou *believest with all thine heart* thou mayest.

                                                            _Acts 8:37._

A performance of ceremonies God hates, unless there is behind them, true
*repentance for sin*.

YOUR *new moons* and your *appointed feasts my soul hateth*: they are a
trouble unto me; *I* am weary to bear them.

                                                          _Isaiah 1:14._

TWO men went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, and the
other a publican. The *Pharisee, stood and prayed thus with himself,*
God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are. . . . *I fast twice
in the week, I give tithes* of all that I possess. And the *publican,
standing afar off*, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven,
but smote upon his breast, saying, *God be merciful to me a sinner*. I
tell you, *this man* went down to his house *justified* rather than the
other.

                                                        _Luke 18:10-14._

The Pharisee was thinking to *justify himself* before God by his
*prayers, gifts and keeping of holy days* but the the publican with
repentance, and the *believing cry of the sinner*, was saved.

Let us *not neglect* baptism; neither think because we *have been
baptized* that we are *safe*. Trust Christ *alone* for salvation; *then*
be baptized.



                               Business.
                 *I will be HINDERED in making money.*


What *profit* is there to *YOU*, even if you get
money--pleasure--position or power-- and in a few short years (at
longest) you lose your soul?

If you cannot remain in your present business and be a Christian, you
had better *give it up*.

FOR what shall it *profit a man*, if he shall *gain the whole world*,
and lose his own soul? Or *what shall a man give in exchange for his
soul*?

                                                         _Mark 8:36-37._

BUT seek ye *first the kingdom of God*, and his righteousness; and all
these things shall be added unto you.

                                                         _Matthew 6:33._

*LAY not up* for yourselves treasures *upon earth*, where moth and rust
doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: but lay up for
yourselves *treasures in heaven*.

                                                      _Matthew 6:19-20._

HE that loveth silver *shall not be satisfied with silver*.

                                                    _Ecclesiastes 5:10._

HE that *trusteth in his riches shall fall*: but the righteous shall
flourish as a branch.

                                                       _Proverbs 11:28._

THEN said Jesus unto His disciples, *If any man* will *come* after *me*,
let him *deny himself*, and take up *his cross* and *follow me*.

FOR *whosoever* will save his life shall lose it: and *whosoever* will
*lose his life for my sake shall find it*.

                                                     _Matthew 16:24-25._

AND Jesus answered and said, Verily I say unto you, There is no man that
hath left houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or
wife, or children, or land, for my sake, and the gospel's, But *he shall
receive a hundredfold now* in this time, houses, and brethren, and
sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions; and
*in the* world to come eternal life.

                                                        _Mark 10:29-30._



                           Christian Living.
                    *Those TRYING to be Christians.*


We are not saved by *trying*, but by *trusting* in what *Christ has done
for us*.

This means:

*Repentance*.

LET *the wicked forsake his way* (that's your part), *and the
unrighteous man his thoughts* (that's your part): *and let him return
unto the Lord* (that's your part), and *He will have mercy upon him*;
and to our God, for He will *abundantly pardon* (God's part.).

                                                           _Isaiah 55:7_

*Faith*.

FOR *by grace are ye saved through faith*; and that not of yourselves;
it is the *gift of God*: not of works, lest any man should boast.

                                                     _Ephesians 2:8--9._

*VERILY, verily*, I say unto you, *He that heareth My word*, and
*believeth* on Him (God) that sent Me (Christ), *hath* everlasting life,
and shall not come into judgment, but *hath passed out of death into
life*.

                                                _John 5:24. A.V. & R.V._

*Receiving*.

BUT as many as *received Him* (Christ), to them gave He *power to become
the sons of God*, even to them that *believe on His name*.

                                                            _John 1:12._

*Committing*.

*COMMIT* thy way unto the LORD; trust also in him; and he shall bring it
to pass.

                                                          _Psalms 37:5._

*IF thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus*, and shalt believe
in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be
saved. For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; *and with
the mouth confession is made unto salvation*.

                                                       _Romans 10:9-10._



                           Christian Living.
                      *STRENGTH for holding out.*


BUT ye *shall* receive *power*, after that the *Holy Ghost* is come upon
you.

                                                             _Acts 1:8._

BE *strong* in the Lord and in the *power* of His *might*.

                                                       _Ephesians 6:10._

PUT on the *whole armor of God*, that ye may be *able to stand* against
the *wiles* of the *devil*.

                                                       _Ephesians 6:11._

WHEREFORE take unto you the *whole armour* of God, that ye may be *able*
to *withstand* in the *evil day*, and *having done all, to stand*.

                                                       _Ephesians 6:13._

STAND therefore, *having your loins girt about with truth*, and having
on the breastplate of righteousness.

                                                       _Ephesians 6:14._

ABOVE all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to
quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the *helmet of
salvation*, and the SWORD OF THE SPIRIT, which is the *word* of God.

                                                   _Ephesians 6:16--17._

WATCH ye, *stand fast* in the *faith*, quit you like men, *be strong*.

                                                  _I Corinthians 16:13._

BE *strong* and of *good courage;* be not *afraid*, neither be thou
*dismayed*: for the *Lord* thy *God* is with thee *whithersoever thou
goest*.

                                                           _Joshua 1:9._

THE Lord is my *light and* my *salvation*; whom *shall I fear*? the Lord
is the *strength* of my *life*; of whom *shall I be afraid*?

                                                          _Psalms 27:1._

AND He said unto me, My *grace is sufficient* for thee: for my
*strength* is made perfect in *weakness*. Most gladly therefore will I
rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon
me.

                                                  _II Corinthians 12:9._

I CAN *do* ALL THINGS *through Christ* which strenghteneth me.

                                                     _Philippians 4:13._



                           Christian Living.
                        *How to GROW In grace.*


If you earnestly desire to grow in grace according to God's commands,
covenant to do the following things *daily; pray, study* your Bible,
*confess Christ*, try to *lead souls* to Christ, and *seek the society*
of Christian people, and you will do so. Let us see what God says
concerning these things, and their importance.

*1st. Daily prayer.*

PRAY *without ceasing*.

                                                 _I Thessalonians 5:17._

WATCH ye therefore and pray *always*.

                                                           _Luke 21:36._

MEN ought *always* to pray.

                                                            _Luke 18:1._

I WILL therefore that men *pray every where*.

                                                        _I Timothy 2:8._

*CALL unto me and I will answer thee*; and shew thee great and mighty
things, which thou knowest not.

                                                        _Jeremiah 33:3._

*2nd. Daily STUDY of God's Word.*

AND now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace,
which is *able to build you up*.

                                                           _Acts 20:32._

THESE were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received
the word with all *readiness of mind*, and *searched the Scriptures
daily*, whether those things were so.

                                                           _Acts 17:11._

*STUDY* to show thyself *approved* unto God, a workman that needeth not
to be ashamed, *rightly dividing* the word of truth.

                                                      _II Timothy 2:15._

AS newborn babes, *desire* the sincere milk of the word, that ye may
grow thereby.

                                                          _I Peter 2:2._

THY words were found, and *I did eat them*; and thy word was unto me
*the joy and rejoicing of mine heart*.

                                                        _Jeremiah 15:16_

*Make this last verse your prayer.*

OPEN thou mine eyes, *that I may behold* wondrous things out of thy law.

                                                         _Psalms 119:18_

*3rd. Daily CONFESS Christ.*

LET your *light so shine before men*, that they may see your good works,
and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

                                                         _Matthew 5:16._

YE are my *witnesses*, saith the Lord, and my servant whom I have
chosen.

                                                         _Isaiah 43:10._

SING unto the Lord, bless his name; *shew forth* his salvation *from day
to day*.

                                                          _Psalms 96:2._

WHOSOEVER therefore shall *confess me before men*, him will I confess
also before my Father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall *deny me*
before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven.

                                                    _Matthew 10:32--33._

*4th. Daily SEEK OTHERS for Christ.*

I HAVE chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and *bring forth
fruit*.

                                                           _John 15:16._

HE that believeth on me, *the works that I do shall he do also*; and
greater works than these shall he do.

                                                           _John 14:12._

AND daily in the temple, and in every house, they ceased not to *teach
and preach Jesus Christ*.

                                                            _Acts 5:42._

WE then, as *workers together with him*, beseech you also that ye
receive not the grace of God in vain.

                                                   _II Corinthians 6:1._

*5th. Daily seek CHRISTIAN SOCIETY.*

BLESSED is the man that *walketh not in the council of the ungodly*, nor
standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful.

                                                           _Psalms 1:1._

HE that walketh with wise men shall be wise: but *a companion of fools
shall be destroyed*.

                                                       _Proverbs 13:20._



                           Christian Living.
                 *Results of Keeping CLOSE to CHRIST.*


  - Your *own soul* will be enriched.
  - Persons will be *saved*.
  - Christians will be *built up*.
  - Your church will become *aggressive*.
  - The word of God will be *honored*.
  - Jesus Christ will be *glorified*.
  - The Holy Ghost *will not be grieved*.
  - You will be *ready* for any work.
  - You will be *devoted* to Jesus Christ.
  - You will be *successful* because faithful.
  - New *methods* will be used.
  - Your *influence* will be more telling.
  - Your life will be *less selfish*.
  - Your *expectations* will be more heavenly.
  - Your *joy* will be more abiding.
  - Your *hope* will be brighter.
  - Your *courage* more undaunted.
  - Your *service* more acceptable to God.
  - In life you will be *active*; in death you will be *ready*; in
    heaven you will *shine*.

*Some PROMISES to encourage us.*

TAKE my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in
heart: and ye shall *find rest unto your souls*.

FOR my *yoke is easy*, and my burden is *light*.

                                                    _Matthew 11:29--30._

BUT if we *walk in the light*, as he is in the light, *we have
fellowship* one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanseth us from all sin.

                                                           _I John 1:7._

DRAW nigh *to God*, and he *will draw* nigh to you.

                                                            _James 4:8._

CAST thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee: he shall
*never suffer the righteous to be moved*.

                                                         _Psalms 55:22._

THOU wilt *keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee:
because he trusteth in thee*.

                                                          _Isaiah 26:3._



                           Christian Living.
               *Results FOLLOWING repentance and faith.*


Through coming to Christ a man,

*1st. Becomes a CHILD OF GOD.*

BUT as many as *received Him* (Christ), to *them gave* he *power* to
*become* the *sons* of God.

                                                            _John 1:12._

*2nd. Has Everlasting LIFE*.

VERILY, *verily*, I say unto you, he that *heareth my word, and
believeth on Him* that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not
come into condemnation (judgment); but is *passed from death unto life*.

                                                            _John 5:24._

*3rd. Receives the HOLY SPIRIT*.

THEN Peter said unto them, *Repent, and be baptized every one of you in
the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins*, and ye shall
receive the *gift* of the Holy Ghost.

                                                            _Acts 2:38._

*4th. Has FELLOWSHIP with others*.

THEN they that gladly received his word were *baptized*: and the same
day there *were added* unto them about *three thousand souls*.

AND they continued steadfastly in the apostles' doctrine and fellowship,
and in breaking of bread, and in prayers.

                                                        _Acts 2:41--42._

*5th. Has God's PROMISES*.

WHEREBY are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises.

                                                         _II Peter 1:4._

*6th. Is called to SERVICE*.

FOR the Son of man is as a man taking a far journey, who left his house,
and gave authority to his servants, and to every man his work.

                                                           _Mark 13:34._

*7th. Possesses HEAVEN*.

IN my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have
told you. I go to *prepare a place for you*.

                                                             _John 14:2_



                              Church, The-
                    *Must I JOIN to be a Christian?*


Do not join the Church unless you are saved--If you are saved, you will
*want to join the church*, and you can not live as useful a life out of
the church as in it, and the church needs your help.

THEN they that gladly received his word were baptized: and the same day
there were *added unto them* about three thousand souls.

                                                            _Acts 2:41._

AND they *continued steadfastly* in the apostles' *doctrine* and
*fellowship*, and in the *breaking of bread*, and in *prayers*.

                                                            _Acts 2:42._

AND they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and *breaking
bread from house to house*, did eat their meat with gladness and
singleness of heart.

                                                            _Acts 2:46._

PRAISING God, and having favor with all the people. *And the Lord added
unto the church daily such as should be saved*.

                                                            _Acts 2:47._

ONE shall say, I am the Lord's;  . . . and another shall *subscribe with
his hand unto the Lord*.

                                                          _Isaiah 44:5._

NOT *forsaking the assembling of ourselves together*, as the manner of
some is; but exhorting one another: and so much the more, as ye see the
day approaching.

                                                        _Hebrews 10:25._

The Church is the best institution on earth, because established by
Christ-- When you fight the church, you are striking at Jesus Christ, as
the church is His bride.

THEY shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, saying,
Come, and let us *join ourselves to the Lord in a perpetual covenant*
that shall *not be forgotten*.

                                                        _Jeremiah 50:5._



                              Confession.
                      *Confusing Christ PUBLICLY.*


*Confess* Christ, or He will *deny* us.

WHOSOEVER therefore shall *confess me before men*, him will I confess
also before my Father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall *deny me*
before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven.

                                                      _Matthew 10:32-33_

WHOSOEVER therefore shall be *ashamed of me and of my words* in this
adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall *the Son of man be
ashamed*.

                                                            _Mark 8:38._

THAT if thou *shalt confess with thy mouth* (not your influence) the
*Lord Jesus*, and *shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised Him
from the dead, thou shalt be saved*.

                                                          _Romans 10:9._

ALSO I say unto you, *whosoever shall confess me before men*, him shall
the Son of man confess before the angels of God: But he that *denieth me
before men* shall be denied before the angels of God.

                                                          _Luke 12:8-9._

We should confess Christ, not only to *honor Him*, but because of the
*influence we may have on others*.

ONE of the two which heard John speak, and followed him, was Andrew
Simon Peter's brother.

He first findeth his own brother Simon and *saith unto him, we have
found the Messias*, which is, being interpreted, the Christ, and he
*brought him to Jesus*.

                                                        _John 1:40--42._

NEVERTHELESS among the chief rulers also many believed on him; but
*because of the Pharisees they did not confess him*, lest they should be
put out of the synagogue: for they *loved the praise of men* more than
the praise of God.

                                                       _John 12:42--43._

Illustration: Mark 5:15-20



                             Consecration.


I BESEECH you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye
*present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God*,
which is your reasonable service.

                                                          _Romans 12:1._

"Consecration means to be willing to be anything, or nothing, to go
anywhere, or everywhere, at any time or at all times for God."

LET us *lay aside every weight*, and the sin which doth so easily beset
us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us,

LOOKING unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith.

                                                       _Hebrews 12:1-2._

WHETHER therefore ye *eat*, or *drink*, or *whatsoever ye do, do all to
the glory of God*.

                                                  _I Corinthians 10:31._

AND whatsoever *ye do in word or deed, do all in the name* of the *Lord
Jesus*, giving thanks to God and the Father by Him.

                                                      _Colossians 3:17._

    Dear Savior, help me every day
    To live more nearly as I pray;
    I would walk daily by thy side,
    And trust in thee whate'er betide.

    Help me to live so near to thee
    Thy likeness may be seen in me;
    Make me so gentle, kind and true
    That I will do as thou wouldst do.

    To win some precious souls for thee.
    My errand here on earth would be;
    And every day till thou shalt come
    To do some good, to help some one.

Frequently ask your heart if you are doing the will of God.

Accustom yourself to do everything in the name of Jesus Christ, as His
disciple.

See that every day shall be marked by at least one special work of love.

Wherever you go, inwardly pray that you do no evil, but be the *means of
some good*.



                                Christ.
                              *His Deity.*


One of the proofs that Christ is the Son of God, is the fact that we
have several titles *applied to Christ in the New Testament* that are
*applied to Jehovah* in the *Old Testament*.

THE word which God sent unto the children of Israel, *preaching peace by
Jesus Christ*: (He is Lord of all).

                                                           _Acts 10:36._

BUT we speak the wisdom of God *in a mystery*, even the hidden wisdom,
which God ordained before the world unto our glory. Which none of the
princes of this world knew: for had they known it, they *would not have
crucified the Lord of glory*.

                                                 _I Corinthians 2:7--8._

AND Thomas answered and said unto him, *My Lord and my God*. Jesus saith
unto him, Thomas because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed: blessed
are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. . . . But these are
written, that ye *might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of
God*; and that believing ye might have life through his name.

                                                    _John 20:28-29, 31._

WHOSOEVER believeth *that Jesus is the Christ is born of God*: and every
one that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten of him.
. . . Who is he that *overcometh* the world, but he *that believeth that
Jesus is the Son of God*?

                                                        _I John 5:1, 5._

WHO *is a liar* but *he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ*? He is
anti-christ, that denieth the Father and the Son. Whosoever *denieth the
Son*, the same hath not the Father: (but) he that acknowledgeth the Son
hath the Father *also*.

                                                       _I John 2:22-23._



                           Christian Science.
                     *Its NON-CHRISTIAN character.*


"Christian Science" is nothing new. It is a mixture of exploded theories
and issues of the ancient world. Moreover, it is neither "Christian" nor
"Science" for both the personality of Christ and matter are denied, and
there could he no Christ without personality nor science without matter.
This unscientific cult is not only not Christian but it denies many
truths of the Bible.

*1st. A personal God.*

The second article in the platform of Christian Science says, "God is
mind. He is divine principle, *not person*," "He and the universe are
the same," or "He is the 'substance' and the universe and man are
'manifestations.' "

The Christian says:

OUR *Father* which art in heaven.

                                                          _Matthew 6:9._

*2nd. Christ and His Atonement.*

Though they sometimes speak of Christ as a great metaphysician, they
maintain that there is *no real body*, and if no body, then no
suffering--therefore Christ did not suffer on the cross.

*3rd. Sin.*

The belief that you have *no real body* enables you to dispose of the
question of sin. If the body is only a phantom then sin would only be
the phantom of a phantom; an easy way for a sinner to relieve himself of
personal responsibility to God.

*4th. A personal devil.*

Mrs. Eddy says, "A lie is all the devil there is." Vol. 2, Page 85. See
scripture pages 104

and 118.

*5th. The reality of prayer.*

They have something that corresponds to prayer, but their text-book
says, "Prayer to a personal God is an hindrance."

The following are a few of the many scriptures which have reference to
the folly of such heresies:

HEREBY know ye the Spirit of God: Every spirit that *confesseth that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God*.

                                                           _I John 4:2._



                           Christian Science.
                        *God warns AGAINST It.*


AND every spirit that *confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh is not of God*: and this is that *spirit* of antichrist, whereof
ye have heard that it should come; and even now already is in the world.

                                                           _I John 4:3._

FOR he hath *made him to be sin for us*, who knew no sin; that we might
be made the righteousness of God in him.

                                                  _II Corinthians 5:21._

FOR many *deceivers are entered into the world*, who confess not that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver and an antichrist.

                                                          _II John 1:7._

WHO his *own self bare our sins in his own body* on the tree, that we,
being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness: by whose stripes ye
were healed.

                                                         _I Peter 2:24._

AND almost all things are by the law purged with blood; and *without
shedding of blood is no remission*.

                                                         _Hebrews 9:22._

MANY will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in
thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done
many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, *I never knew
you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity*.

                                                      _Matthew 7:22-23._

FOR the *mystery of iniquity* doth already work; only he who now letteth
will let, until he be taken out of the way. And then shall that *Wicked
be revealed*, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth,
and *shall destroy with the brightness of his coming*.

                                               _II Thessalonians 2:7-8._

AND no marvel; for *Satan himself is transformed into an angel of
light*.

                                                 _II Corinthians 11:14._



                              Conversions.
                    *Instantaneous. Bible EXAMPLES.*


*God says you can be saved AT ONCE.*

*LOOK unto me*, and *be ye saved*, all the ends of the earth: for I am
God, and there is none else.

                                                         _Isaiah 45:22._

*The Jailer believed, and was saved the SAME NIGHT*.

AND they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou *shalt be
saved*, and thy house. And they spake unto him the word of the Lord, and
to all that were in his house.

                                                        _Acts 16:31-32._

The thief believed and was saved the *same day*.

AND he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy
kingdom. And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, *To day shalt
thou be with me in paradise*.

                                                        _Luke 23:42-43._

The woman believed and was saved the *same hour*.

AND he said unto her, *Thy sins are forgiven*. And they that sat at meat
with him began to say within themselves, Who is this that forgiveth sins
also? And he said to the woman, *Thy faith hath saved thee;* go in
peace.

                                                         _Luke 7:48-50._

*God wants you to turn from your sins*.

LET the wicked *forsake his way*, and the unrighteous man *his
thoughts*: and let him *return unto the Lord*, and he *will* have mercy
upon him: *and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon*.

                                                          _Isaiah 55:7._

Jesus will forgive your sins and save if you will *ask and obey*.

HE . . . that believeth, *hath* (not will have) everlasting life.

                                                            _John 5:24._

HIM that cometh to *me, I will in no wise cast out*.

                                                            _John 6:37._



                                Doubter.
                          *One who is HONEST.*


*"HOW MAY I KNOW THERE IS A GOD?"*

AND the *word was made flesh*, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld His
glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father), full of grace
and truth.

                                                            _John 1:14._

NO man hath seen God at any time, the *only begotten Son* which is in
the bosom of the Father, He hath declared him.

                                                            _John 1:18._

JESUS saith unto him, Thomas, because thou hast seen me, thou hast
believed, blessed are they that *have not seen and yet have believed*.

                                                           _John 20:29._

BUT these are *written*, that ye might *believe* that *Jesus* is the
*Christ*, the *Son of God*; and that *believing* ye might have *life
through His name*.

                                                           _John 20:31._

IF any man will do *His will*, he *shall know* of the *doctrine*,
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself.

                                                            _John 7:17._

HE that is of God heareth God's words: ye therefore hear them not,
*because ye are not of God*.

                                                            _John 8:47._

THEN saith the woman of Samaria unto him, How is it that thou being a
Jew askest drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria? for the Jews have
no dealing with the Samaritans.

                                                             _John 4:9._

BELIEVEST thou not that I am in the Father and the Father in me? the
words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself, but the *Father that
dwelleth in me*, He doeth the works.

                                                           _John 14:10._

BELIEVE me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else
believe me for the very works' sake.

                                                           _John 14:11._

AND whatsoever ye shall ask in *my name, that will I do*, that the
Father may be glorified in the Son.

                                                           _John 14:13._



                                Excuses.
                     *I am a MEMBER of the church.*


Church membership *alone does not save any one*. Jesus made this act
very plain that there must be more than a cold profession of religion.

*NOT every one that saith unto me, Lord*, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven; *but he that doeth the will of my Father* which is in
heaven.

                                                         _Matthew 7:21._

*MANY will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord*, have we not *prophesied
in thy name*? and in thy name have cast out devils? And in thy name done
many wonderful works? and then will I profess unto them, *I never knew
you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity*.

                                                      _Matthew 7:22-23._

THEREFORE whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I
will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock:

And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and
beat upon that house, *and it fell not, for it was founded upon a rock*.

And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not,
shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the
sand:

And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew and beat
upon that house; and *it fell*: and *great was the fall of it*.

                                                      _Matthew 7:24-27._

The great question is, *Have I been born of God*, and am I *showing by
my life* that I am a child of God?

JESUS answered and said unto him, Verily, verily I say unto thee,
*except a man be BORN AGAIN, he* cannot see the kingdom of God.

                                                             _John 3:3._



                                Excuses.
                          *I am GOOD ENOUGH.*


You may *think* you are, but *God does not*.

    He says you are a sinner!

*FOR all have sinned*, and come short of the glory of God.

                                                          _Romans 3:23._

AS it is written, *There is none* righteous, no, *not one*.

                                                          _Romans 3:10._

FOR there is *not a just man upon earth*, that doeth good, and sinneth
not.

                                                    _Ecclesiastes 7:20._

ALL we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned *every one* to his
own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.

                                                          _Isaiah 53:6._

AND he spake this parable unto certain which trusted in themselves that
they were righteous, and despised others: Two men went up into the
temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, and the other a publican. The
Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, God, I thank thee that I am
not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this
publican. *I fast twice in the week*, I *give tithes* of all that I
possess. And the publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so much
as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, *God be
merciful to me a sinner*. I tell you, *this man* went down to his house
*justified rather than the other*: for every one that exalteth himself
shall be abased; and he that *humbleth himself shall be exalted*.

                                                         _Luke 18:9-14._

Not only would God show you that *you are a sinner*, but He would warn
you of the *consequences* of sin, and the *judgement that follows.*

THE wages of sin is *death*.

                                                          _Romans 6:23._

THE soul that sinneth *it shall die*.

                                                          _Ezekiel 18:4_

BE sure your sin *will find you out*.

                                                        _Numbers 32:23._



                                Excuses.
                          *I am NOT very bad.*


THERE is *no difference*: For *all have sinned*.

                                                       _Romans 3:22-23._

THEY are *all gone aside*, they are *all together become filthy*: there
is *none that doeth good*, no, not one.

                                                          _Psalms 14:3._

THERE IS *not a just man upon earth*, that doeth good, and sinneth not.

                                                    _Ecclesiastes 7:20._

FOR as many as are of the work of the law are under the curse: for it is
written, *Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things* which
are written in the book of the law *to do them*.

                                                       _Galatians 3:10._

Let me ask you, have you kept all of God's law? You say, "no, of course
not; no one has." Very good; your admitting that you have failed
convicts you, for we read.

*WHOSOEVER* shall keep the *whole law*, and yet offend in *one point*,
he is *guilty of all*.

                                                           _James 2:10._

Break *one* link in your chain, and your anchor goes to the bottom as
quickly as it would if ten links were broken. Break *one* of God's
Commandments, and you are *under the curse* of a broken law as truly as
you would be if you broke all of them. While there are *degrees* of sin,
there is *no difference* as to the fact of guilt before God.

AND he said unto them, Ye are they which justify yourselves before men;
*but God knoweth your hearts*: for that which is highly esteemed among
men is abomination in the sight of God.

                                                           _Luke 16:15._

Do you keep God's greatest Commandment?

THOU shalt love the Lord thy God with *all* thy heart, and with *all*
thy soul, and with all thy mind.

                                                     _Matthew 22:37-38._

BUT the Scripture hath concluded *all under sin*.

                                                       _Galatians 3:22._

Illustration: Luke 18:10-14.



                                Excuses.
               *I am NOT GOOD ENOUGH to be a Christian.*


Jesus came to *save sinners*, and not the righteous!

BUT when Jesus heard that, he said unto them, *They that be whole need
not a physician, but they that are sick*. But go ye and learn what that
meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: for I am not come to
*call the righteous, but sinners* to repentance.

                                                      _Matthew 9:12-13._

NOT by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his
mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the
Holy Ghost.

                                                            _Titus 3:5._

*LET the wicked forsake his way* (that's your part), *and the
unrighteous man his thoughts* (that's your part): *and let him return
unto the Lord* (that's your part), and He will have *mercy* upon him;
and to our God, for *He will abundantly pardon*. (God's part.)

                                                          _Isaiah 55:7._

FOR the Son of Man is come *to seek* and *to save* that *which was
lost*.

                                                           _Luke 19:10._

COME now and let us *reason together*, saith the Lord; though your
*sins* be *as scarlet*, they shall be as *white* as *snow*; though they
be red like *crimson*, they *shall be as wool*.

                                                          _Isaiah 1:18._

THIS is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to *save sinners*; of whom *I am the chief*.

                                                       _I Timothy 1:15._

*IF we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins*.

                                                           _I John 1:9._

*ALL* that the Father giveth me shall *come* to me; and him that *cometh
to me I will in no wise cast out.*

                                                            _John 6:37._

Read: Mark 2:17; Ephesians 2:8, 9.

Illustration, Mark 5:25-34.



                                Excuses.
                       *I am TOO GREAT a sinner.*


It is refreshing to find one who feels that he is a great sinner, as
most people have a *very good opinion of themselves*. When one sees his
or her sins, and cries to God, he or she has every assurance that there
is forgiveness.

THIS is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ
Jesus came into the world *to save sinners; of whom I am chief*.

                                                       _I Timothy 1:15._

FOR the Son of man is *come to seek and save that which was lost*.

                                                           _Luke 19:10._

The fact that you are a sinner assures you that you *may be saved*,
because Christ came to save sinners; and if you confess and forsake sin
you have God's Word for it that *you are forgiven*.

LET the wicked *forsake his way*, and the unrighteous man his thoughts:
and *let him return unto the Lord*, and *He will have mercy* upon him;
and to our God, for *He will abundantly pardon*.

                                                          _Isaiah 55:7._

HE that covereth his sins shall not prosper: but *whoso confesseth and
forsaketh them shall have mercy*.

                                                       _Proverbs 28:13._

FOR *whosoever* shall *call* upon the name of the Lord *shall be saved*.

                                                         _Romans 10:13._

*WHOSOEVER will*, let him *take* the *water* of life freely.

                                                     _Revelation 22:17._

"*Whosoever* means any one, and *you too*."

HIM that cometh to *me I will in no wise cast out*.

                                                            _John 6:37._

Here is the plain promise that "*if you come*", you *will not* be "cast
out." Will you come?

WHEREFORE He is able also to *save them to the uttermost* that come unto
God by him.

                                                         _Hebrews 7:25._

If you are among the "uttermost" ones, *come now* and rejoice in a full
salvation.

Illustration: John 4:7-30.



                                Excuses.
                               *Not now.*


COME; for all things are *now ready*.

                                                           _Luke 14:17._

*TODAY* if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.

                                                         _Hebrews 3:15._

SEEK ye the Lord *while He may be found*, call ye upon Him *while He is
near*.

                                                          _Isaiah 55:6._

BEHOLD, *now is the accepted time*; behold, now is *the day of
salvation*.

                                                   _II Corinthians 6:2._

*BOAST not* thyself of *tomorrow*; for thou knowest not what a day may
bring forth.

                                                        _Proverbs 27:1._

GO to now, ye that say, *today or tomorrow we will go* into such a city,
and continue there a year, and buy and sell.

                                                           _James 4:13._

This may be your *last opportunity*.

I WILL say to *my soul*, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up *for many
years*; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said unto
him, *Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee*.

                                                        _Luke 12:19-20._

WHAT are you waiting for? To better yourself? This will be a waste of
time, as we have learned that your trying and doing and working, will
not even help to save you, but hinder you. Do you say, 'there is time
enough?' How do you know it? God says:

*MY* spirit *shall not always* strive *with* man.

                                                          _Genesis 6:3._

PREPARE to meet thy God.

                                                            _Amos 4:12._

THEREFORE *be ye also ready*: for in such an hour as ye think not the
*Son of man cometh*.

                                                        _Matthew 24:44._

WATCH therefore, *for ye know neither the day* nor *the hour* wherein
*the Son of man cometh*.

                                                        _Matthew 25:13._

Illustration: Acts 24:24-27.



                                Excuses.
              *There are Church members NO BETTER THAN I!*


That may be, but you can not save your soul by finding some church
member who is failing to live as he or she ought to live. The more you
look at them, the more you are apt to *be like them*, and if they are
lost, and you are not saved, you *both will perish together*.

THEREFORE *thou art inexcusable,* O man, whosoever thou art that
*judgest*: for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself;
*for thou that judgest doest the same things*. But we are sure that the
judgment of God is according to truth against them which commit such
things. *And thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest* them which do such
things, and *doest the same, that thou* shalt escape the judgments of
God?

                                                         _Romans 2:1-3._

*JUDGE not*, that ye not judged. For *with what judgment ye judge, ye
shall be judged*: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to
you again. *And why beholdest thou the mote* that is in thy brother's
eye, but *considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye*? Or how
wilt thou say to thy brother, Let *me pull* out the mote out of thine
eye; and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye? *Thou hypocrite*, first
cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt *thou see
clearly* to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye.

                                                        _Matthew 7:1-5._

SO then every one of us shall give an account of *himself to God*.

                                                         _Romans 14:12._

Account of "*himself*", not his neighbor.

FOR we must *all appear before the judgment seat of Christ*; that every
one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath
done, whether it be good or bad.

                                                  _II Corinthians 5:10._

You had better *save your own soul*, and try to help others than
criticise them. If you know how, they ought to like, be a Christian and
show them how the counterfeit christian proves the genuine, just and the
counterfeit dollar proves the genuine.

You may as well argue "Don't deposit money in a bank, there are men in
the banking business that have embezzled. Don't join the lodge or trades
unions." There are hypocrites in every lodge and union in America. There
are hypocrites everywhere.

*Remember*--When the Church goes through the Pearly Gates, those
hyporites will be left on the *outside of the gate*, on *your* side,
unless you repent, and you will have to spend *all eternity with them*.
Would it not be better to repent, and live with them a few years in the
Church, than to spend *all eternity* with them elsewhere? You must spend
some time with those hypocrites, somewhere. Where shall it be?

SO then every one of us shall give *account of himself to God*.

                                                         _Romans 14:12._

FOR it is written, as I live, saith the Lord, *every knee shall bow to
me*, and *every tongue shall confess to God.*

                                                         _Romans 14:11._

AND whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast into
*the lake of fire*.

                                                     _Revelation 20:15._

Take Christ as Your Saviour, a perfect example, and do not lose your
soul through looking at inconsistent christians.

HE that *believeth* and is *baptized shall be saved; but* he that
*believeth not shall be damned*.

                                                           _Mark 16:16._

*FOR by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves*;
it is the *gift of God*; not of works, lest any man should boast.

                                                     _Ephesians 2:8, 9._

Illustration: John 21:19-22.



                                Excuses.
                 *My companions, Keep me from Christ.*


Great blessing awaits those who will *turn from bad associates*, but the
curse of God is upon those who refuse to do so--Read for yourself and
see--

BLESSED is the man that *walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly*, nor
standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth *in* the seat of the
scornful.

                                                           _Psalms 1:1._

HE that walketh with wise men shall be wise: *but a companion of fools
shall be destroyed*.

                                                       _Proverbs 13:20._

ENTER not into the *path of the wicked*, and go not in the *way of evil
men*. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and *pass away*.

                                                    _Proverbs 4:14--15._

*MY son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not*. If they say, Come
with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent
without cause: Let us swallow them up alive as the grave; and whole, as
those that go down into the pit: . . . Cast in thy lot among us, let us
all have one purse: *My son, walk not thou in the way with them; refrain
thy foot from their path*.

                                            _Proverbs 1:10--12, 14--15._

YE adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the *friendship of the*
world *is enmity with God*?

                                                            _James 4:4._

BE ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers: for what fellowship
hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion hath light
with darkness!

                                                  _II Corinthians 6:14._

By the help of God you can cut loose from the old crowd, and live a
clean life--Begin now.

WHEREFORE *come out from among them*, and be ye *separate*, saith the
Lord.

                                                  _II Corinthians 6:17._

Read: Proverbs 29:25; Mark 8:38; Matthew 5:11,12.



                                Excuses.
                   *I can not give up my EVIL WAYS!*


If you seek to know the Lord and trust In Him, He *will* give you power
to overcome your evil ways. He has done this for others, *why not for
you*?"

I CAN do all things through *Christ* which *strengtheneth me*.

                                                     _Philippians 4:13._

IF the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.

                                                            _John 8:36._

AND Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, *All power is given unto me
in heaven* and in *earth*.

                                                        _Matthew 28:18._

Christ came with power from heaven *for you*, if you will appropriate
it--

THERE hath *no temptation* taken you but such as is common to man: but
*God is faithful*, who will not *suffer you to be tempted above that ye
are able*; but will with the temptation also *make a way to escape*,
that ye may be *able to bear it*.

                                                  _I Corinthians 10:13._

This verse shows that your temptations are "*common*" to men, and not
peculiar to you, and you have no harder fight than others.

WHEREFORE *he is able also to save* to the uttermost *them that come
unto God by Him*, seeing He ever liveth to make intercession for them.

                                                         _Hebrews 7:25._

As you *think on your evil ways*, think of what God says concerning the
life of sin, and be warned by it.

BE not deceived; God is not mocked: for *whatsoever* a man *soweth, that
shall he also reap*.

                                                        _Galatians 6:7._

FOR he that soweth to his *flesh shall* of the flesh *reap corruption*;
but he that soweth to the *Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life
everlasting*.

                                                        _Galatians 6:8._

*FOR the wages of sin is death*; but the gift of God is eternal life
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

                                                          _Romans 6:23._

Read: Revelation 21:8; I Corinthians 15:1-4.



                                Excuses.
                    *There is TOO MUCH to give up.*


Is it because of your *business*, and *a desire to make money*, that you
are unwilling to accept Christ? If so, listen to the *question* God puts
to you!

FOR what *shall it profit a man,* if *he shall gain the whole world*,
and *lose his own soul*?

                                                            _Mark 8:36._

God only asks you to give up that which *is not for your own good*?

FOR the Lord God is a *sun* and *shield*: the *Lord* will *give grace*
and *glory; no good thing will he withhold* from them that *walk
uprightly.*

                                                         _Psalms 84:11._

God gave up his son *to die for your sins*, and will *now supply all
your needs*.

HE that spared not His *own Son*, but *delivered him up* for *us all*,
how shall he not with him also *freely give us all things*?

                                                          _Romans 8:32._

Take Christ, attend to the most important things first and the less
important will be provided later.

BUT *seek* ye first the *kingdom of God*, and *His righteousness*; and
*all these things shall* be *added unto you*.

                                                         _Matthew 6:33._

By giving up *worldly things, you will receive manifold more* in return
in spiritual blessing.

AND he said unto them, Verily I say unto you, There is no man that hath
*left house, or parents, or brethren, or wife, or children*, for the
kingdom of God's sake, Who shall not receive *manifold more in this
present time*, and in the *world to come* life everlasting.

                                                        _Luke 18:29-30._

FOR he that *soweth to his flesh* shall of the flesh *reap corruption*;
but he that *soweth to the Spirit* shall of the *Spirit reap life
everlasting*.

                                                        _Galatians 6:8._

Jesus said, "Ye can not serve *two* masters," (Matthew 6:24) but you
will serve *one*,--Christ or the Devil, which shall it be? The Devil
pays, "*the wages of death*," (Romans 6:23) but Christ *gives eternal
life*.

Illustration: Matthew 19:16-22.



                                Excuses.
                       *I CAN NOT surrender all.*


Some think it means too much sacrifice.

FOR whosoever will save his life *shall lose it*; but whosoever shall
lose his life for my sake and the gospel's, the same *shall save it*.

                                                            _Mark 8:35._

AND Jesus answered and said, Verily I say unto you, There is no man that
hath *left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or
wife, or children, or lands* for my sake, and the gospel's; but he shall
receive an hundredfold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and
sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions; and in
the world to come eternal life.

                                                        _Mark 10:29-30._

Can you not *give up some thing* for Christ, who has done so much for
you?

FOR ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, though he was
rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that *ye through his* poverty
might be *rich*.

                                                   _II Corinthians 8:9._

*Paul* gave up *all* for Christ.

BUT what things were *gain to me*, those *I counted loss* for Christ.

                                                      _Philippians 3:7._

If we follow Christ, *as we should*, we will be called to make *some
sacrifice*.

SO likewise, whosoever he be of you that *forsaketh not all that he
hath*, he cannot be my disciple.

                                                           _Luke 14:33._

We are *strengthened* however in our suffering when we recall the
promise.

*IF we suffer, we shall also reign* with him: if we deny him, he also
will deny *us*.

                                                      _II Timothy 2:12._



                                Excuses.
                   *The christian life Is TOO HARD.*


Some say that the Christian life is hard, but they are mistaken about
this; they may have tried to *reform in their own strength*, but they
know nothing about the power of the Spirit in their souls *to save,
keep* and *deliver* them--

FOR this is the love of God, that we *keep His commandments: and His
commandments are not grievous*.

                                                           _I John 5:3._

HER ways are *ways of pleasantness*, and all her *paths are peace*.

                                                        _Proverbs 3:17._

THOU wilt show me the *path* of *life*: in thy presence is *fullness of
joy*; at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

                                                         _Psalms 16:11._

FOR the Lord God is a *sun* and *shield*: the *Lord* will *give grace*
and *glory: no good thing will be withhold* from them that *walk
uprightly*.

                                                         _Psalms 84:11._

It is the *sinful*, and *rebellious* life that is hard.

There are certain worldly pleasures that please the carnal heart for a
few moments, but these are like the foam on the "soda water" that passes
quickly, they do not give true satisfaction.

GOOD understanding *giveth* favor: but the *way of transgressors is
hard*.

                                                       _Proverbs 13:15._

BUT the wicked are *like the troubled sea*, when it cannot rest, whose
waters cast up mire and dirt.

                                                         _Isaiah 57:20._

THERE is *no peace*, saith my God, unto the wicked.

                                                         _Isaiah 57:21._

REJOICE, O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee in the
days of thy youth, and *walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the
sight of thine eyes*: but know thou, that *for all these things God will
bring thee into judgment*.

                                                    _Ecclesiastes 11:9._

Read: II Thessalonians 1:7-9; Luke 16:19-31.



                                Excuses.
                       *I have tried and FAILED.*


You say you have tried and failed!

Was it God's fault, or your own?

Let us call your attention to a *few things it done by you*, will assure
you success in the Christian life--

*1st. Seek the Lord with ALL YOUR HEART*.

AND ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me *with all
your heart*.

                                                       _Jeremiah 29:13._

*2nd. You must OBEY GOD.*

IF ye be willing and *obedient*, ye shall eat the good of the land.

                                                          _Isaiah 1:19._

AND we are His witnesses of these things; and so is also the Holy Ghost,
whom God hath given to them that *obey Him*.

                                                            _Acts 5:32._

*3rd. You must CONFESS Christ.*

THAT if thou shalt *confess with thy mouth* (not your influence) the
Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him
from the dead, thou *shalt be saved*. For with the *heart man believeth*
unto righteousness; and with the *mouth confession* is made unto
salvation.

                                                       _Romans 10:9-10._

*4th. You must PRAY.*

YE have not, *because ye ask not*.

                                                            _James 4:2._

FOR whosoever shall *call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved*.

                                                         _Romans 10:13._

FOR the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his *ears are open
unto their prayers*.

                                                         _I Peter 3:12._

*5th. JOIN the church!*

If you have not joined the church, *you ought to do so*.

ONE shall say, I am the Lord's; . . . and another shall *subscribe with
his hand unto the Lord*.

                                                          _Isaiah 44:5._



                                Excuses.
                       *I have TRIED and FAILED.*


You say you have tried and failed!

May I ask you a few questions?

When you began the Christian life, did you:

*1st. Trust Christ's FINISHED WORK alone?*

WHO his own self *bare our sins in his own body on the tree*, that we,
being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness: by whose stripes *ye
were healed*.

                                                         _I Peter 2:24._

*2nd. Did you SURRENDER all to God? God is demanding this.*

MY son give me thine *heart*.

                                                       _Proverbs 23:26._

*3rd. Did you CONFESS CHRIST publicly?*

WHOSOEVER therefore shall *confess me before men*, him will I confess
also before my Father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall *deny me*
before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven.

                                                     _Matthew 10:32-33._

*4th. Did you PRAY constantly?*

PRAY *without ceasing*.

                                                 _I Thessalonians 5:17._

*5th. Did you faithfully STUDY YOUR BIBLE? Have you read it today?*

AS newborn babes, *desire* the sincere milk of the word, that ye may
grow thereby.

                                                          _I Peter 2:2._

*6th. Did you shun EVIL COMPANIONS?*

BLESSED is the man that *walketh not in the council of the ungodly*, nor
*standeth* in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the
scornful.

                                                            _Psalm 1:1._

*7th. Did you GO TO WORK for Christ?*

AND to *every man his work*.

                                                           _Mark 13:34._



                                Excuses.
                 *Can't HOLD OUT! God's KEEPING power.*


Of course you cannot in your own strength. But He is mighty to save. Put
your trust for pardon in the finished work of Christ and let Him come
into your life.

WHO are *kept by the power of God through faith* unto salvation ready to
be revealed in the last time.

                                                          _I Peter 1:5._

BUT the Lord is faithful, who shall *stablish you, and keep you from
evil*.

                                                 _II Thessalonians 3:3._

NOW unto him that is *able to keep you from falling* (R.V. from
stumbling), and to present you faultless before the presence of his
glory with exceeding joy.

                                                            _Jude 1:24._

BEING confident of this very thing, that *he which hath begun a good
work in you will perform it* until the day of Jesus Christ.

                                                      _Philippians 1:6._

FEAR thou not; for *I am with thee*: be not dismayed; for I am thy God:
*I will strenghten* thee; yea I will help thee; yea *I will uphold thee*
with the *right hand* of my *righteousness*.

For I the Lord thy *God* will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee,
*Fear not; I will help thee*.

                                                      _Isaiah 41:10,13._

When you are tempted remember that Christ has promised to deliver you.

THERE hath *no temptation* taken you but such as is *common to man*: but
God is *faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye
are able*; but will WITH THE TEMPTATION ALSO MAKE A WAY OF ESCAPE, that
ye may be *able to bear it*.

                                                  _I Corinthians 10:13._

THE *Lord knoweth how to deliver* the godly out of *temptations*, and to
reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished.

                                                         _II Peter 2:9._

AND I give unto them eternal life; and they *shall never perish*,
neither *shall* any man *pluck them out of my hand*.

                                                            _John 10:28_

MY Father, which gave them me, is greater than all; and *no man* is
*able to pluck them out of my Father's hand*.

                                                           _John 10:29._

FOR the which cause I also suffer these things: nevertheless I am not
ashamed: for I KNOW WHOM I HAVE BELIEVED, and am persuaded that HE IS
ABLE TO KEEP that which I have committed unto Him against that day.

                                                      _II Timothy 1:12._

*HE giveth power to the faint*; and to them that have no might *he
increaseth strength*. Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the
young men shall utterly fall: But they that *wait upon the Lord shall
renew their strength*; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they
shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and *not faint*.

                                                      _Isaiah 40:29-31._

NOW unto him that is *able to do exceeding abundantly above all* that we
ask or think, according to *the power that worketh in us*.

                                                       _Ephesians 3:20._

WHEREFORE he is *able* also to save them to the uttermost that *come
unto God* by Him, seeing He ever liveth to make intercession for them.

                                                         _Hebrews 7:25._

God never gives grace in advance, but He does promise "as thy day thy
strength shall be."

WHEN thou passest through the waters, *I will be with thee*; and through
the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: *when thou walkest through the
fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shall the flame kindle upon
thee*.

                                                          _Isaiah 43:2._



                                Excuses.
                          *I have no FEELING.*


The word "feeling" occurs but once in the Bible in connection with
salvation, and then it is used in connection with the man "Who is past
feeling," but *faith in Christ is mentioned three hundred times*.
Conviction is one thing and emotion is another. The latter does not
necessarily follow the former. Our feelings are like the *weather, they
may change daily*; but God's word, in which we trust, will never change.

Which would you rather trust? God's *unchanging* word, or your
*ever-changing* feelings?

You know you are a sinner and lost. What you need is Jesus Christ. Look
to Him; accept Him; *trust Him; confess Him*; and He will do the rest.
Take the blesser and you will have the blessing.

BUT as many as *received Him* (Christ), to them gave He *power* to
*become* the *sons* of *God*, even to them that *believe on His name*.

                                                            _John 1:12._

See! you are to *receive a personal Saviour*, not work up some special
*feeling*.

If you are waiting for the *feeling* that an earnest working Christian
has, we would have you note, that feeling is the "*fruit*," not the
"*root*" of salvation. A feeling of joy, peace, and rest comes, because
we "*trust*" in Christ, "*confess*" Him as our Savior, "*defend*" His
cause, and try to "*obey*" Him.

AND we are His witnesses of these things; and so is also the Holy Ghost,
whom God hath glven to them that *obey Him*.

                                                            _Acts 5:32._

It is to those that "*obey Him*" that the blessing is given--Repentance
is *doing what God commands you to do*, whether you feel like doing it
or not, and the feeling follows as you seek to do God's will ---

BUT the *fruit of the Spirit* is love, joy, peace, longsuffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith.

                                                       _Galatians 5:22._

Never be guided by the experiences of some one else, but *by God's
Word*.

The Devil's order is: 1st, Feeling; 2nd, Faith; 3rd, Fact; but God's
order is: 1st, Fact; 2nd, Faith; then Feeling.

    "The *Fact* you're a sinner, you cannot but see,
    That *Faith* in Christ saves you, is ever our plea;
    The *feeling* will follow in service and love;
    Then *take* from Christ *Jesus His gift* from above."

AND they said, *Believe* on the *Lord Jesus Christ*, and thou *shalt be
saved*, and thy house.

                                                           _Acts 16:31._

VERILY, *verily*, I say unto you, He that *heareth my word and believeth
on Him* that sent me, HATH EVERLASTING LIFE, and shall not come into
condemnation (judgment); but is *passed from death unto life.*

                                                            _John 5:24._

BUT these are written, that ye might *believe* that *Jesus* is the
*Christ*, the *Son* of *God*; and that *believing* ye might have *life*
through *His name*.

                                                           _John 20:31._

Some are *making more* of their *feelings* than they are of the Word of
the Lord.

Feelings are as changeable as the wind. You get up many a cold morning
when you don't feel like it. Religion with the Christian is obedience;
and the highway leading to the life "hid with Christ in God" is known as
obedience, not feeling.

If I should puncture your arm with a needle and you should be unable to
feel it, your anxiety would be intense, your condition physically would
be regarded as very precarious indeed. When I come to talk to you, of
your soul's salvation, and you say you have no feeling, it shows the
peril of your position.

Your very *indifference* ought to *arouse* you to thoughtfulness and
action---

Illustration: Matthew 9:9.



                                Excuses.
                         *I am not CONCERNED.*


If a man were *asleep* in a burning building, he would be *more in
danger* of losing his life, than he would be if he were *awake*.

So, there is more danger of a man losing his soul, if he is unconcerned,
than there would be if he had some *interest*. God calls you to wake up
and think about these things--

WHEREFORE he saith, *Awake thou that sleepest, and arise* from the dead,
and *Christ shall give thee light*.

                                                       _Ephesians 5:14._

I TELL you, Nay; but, *except ye repent, ye* shall all likewise perish.

                                                            _Luke 13:3._

AND as it is appointed unto men once to die, but *after this the
judgment*.

                                                         _Hebrews 9:27._

*AND ye will not come to me*, that ye might have life.

                                                            _John 5:40._

It you are lost, it will be *your fault*.

These Scriptures teach that you will not come to Christ and that you
prefer darkness to light, and unbelief to faith, and will not turn to
God and be baptized that you may have eternal life in Jesus Christ.

HE that *believeth* and is *baptized shall* be *saved*; but he that
*believeth not shall be damned*.

                                                           _Mark 16:16._

AND these shall *go away into everlasting punishment*.

                                                        _Matthew 25:46._

You *go away*, God does not send you--

THE wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that *forget
God*.

                                                          _Psalms 9:17._

You in your indifference are "*forgetting*" God, not necessarily living
a wicked life--

HOW shall we escape, if we *neglect so great salvation*?

                                                          _Hebrews 2:3._

Read: II Thessalonians 1:1-9.

Illustration: Luke 16:19-31.



                                Excuses.
                 *The INDIFFERENT neglecting his soul.*


Listen to what God says to the indifferent.

His word ought to lead you to the most thoughtful consideration of His
ways.

AWAKE thou that *sleepest*, and arise from the dead.

                                                       _Ephesians 5:14._

Your *indifference* has put you to *sleep* and God calls you to *awake*.

TURN ye, . . . turn ye for *why will ye die*?

                                                        _Ezekiel 33:11._

THE soul that sinneth, *it shall die.*

                                                         _Ezekiel 18:4._

*THE wages of sin is death*.

                                                          _Romans 6:23._

EXCEPT ye *repent*, ye shall all likewise *perish*.

                                                            _Luke 13:3._

HOW shall we escape, if we *neglect* so great salvation?

                                                          _Hebrews 2:3._

BE not deceived; God is not mocked; for *whatsoever* a man *soweth, that
shall he also reap*.

                                                        _Galatians 6:7._

HE that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the *wrath* of God
abideth on him.

                                                            _John 3:36._

HE *that believeth and is baptized shall be saved*; but he that
*believeth not shall be damned*.

                                                           _Mark 16:16._

VERILY, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the door into
the sheepfold, but climbeth up *some other way, the same is a thief and
a robber*.

                                                            _John 10:1._

BE sure *your sin* will *find you out*.

                                                        _Numbers 32:23._

AND the Lord said, My spirit shall not *always strive with man*.

                                                          _Genesis 6:3._

Read: Psalms 9:17; Psalms 11:6; Revelation 2:8.



                                Excuses.
                     *Those who KNOW NOT the way.*


God has made very clear in His word, the fact that *He loves us* and
gave Jesus to *be the way*.

JESUS saith unto him, I am the way, and the truth, and the life: *no man
cometh unto the Father, but by me*.

                                                            _John 14:6._

God wants us to forsake *our* way, which is the *wrong* way.

*LET the wicked forsake his way*, and the unrighteous man his thoughts:
*and let him return unto the* Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and
to our God, *for he will abundantly pardon*.

                                                          _Isaiah 55:7._

God has promised *to hear us* when we call.

THEN shall ye *call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me*, and I
will hearken unto you. And ye shall seek me, and find me, *when ye shall
search for me with all your heart*.

                                                    _Jeremiah 29:12-13._

More, He has promised *to accept us* if we turn to him with true
repentance.

ALL that the Father giveth me shall come to me: *and him that cometh to
I will in no wise cast out*.

                                                            _John 6:37._

Believe. His promise and *know the way*.

VERILY, verily, I say unto you, *He that believeth on me hath
everlasting life*.

                                                            _John 6:47._

TO him gave all the prophets witness, that through his name *whosoever
believeth in him shall receive remission of sins*.

                                                           _Acts 10:43._

IF any man *will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine*, whether it
be of God, or whether I speak of myself.

                                                            _John 7:17._

THAT if thou shalt *confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt
believe in thine heart* that God hath raised him from the dead, thou
shalt be saved.

                                                          _Romans 10:9._



                                Excuses.
                 *I don't know WHAT or HOW to believe.*


Study to know God's will and do it, Christ-like, holy in living and
humble in *service*.

IF any man will do *His will*, he *shall know* of the *doctrine*.

                                                            _John 7:17._

*You are to SEEK!*

AND ye shall seek me, and find me, *when ye shall search for me with all
your heart*.

                                                       _Jeremiah 29:13._

*To LOOK.*

LOOK unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: *for I am God
and there is none else*.

                                                         _Isaiah 45:22._

*To CALL.*

FOR *whosoever shall call* upon *the name* of the *Lord shall be saved*.

                                                         _Romans 10:13._

*To BELIEVE.*

VERILY, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and *believeth
on him* that sent me, HATH EVERLASTING LIFE, and shall not come into
condemnation; but is *passed from death unto life*.

                                                            _John 5:24._

*To Receive.*

BUT as many as *received Him*, to them gave He *power* to become the
*sons of God*, even to them that *believe on His name*.

                                                            _John 1:12._

*To Taste.*

O taste and see that the Lord is good: *blessed is the man that trusteth
in Him*.

                                                          _Psalms 34:8._

*To Submit.*

THEREFORE to him that *knoweth* to do *good*, and doeth it not, to him
*it is sin*.

                                                           _James 4:17._

*You are to COME.*

COME unto me *all* ye that *labor* and are *heavy laden*, and *I will
give you rest*.

                                                        _Matthew 11:28._

*To COMMIT.*

FOR the which cause I also suffer these things: nevertheless I am not
ashamed: for I *know whom* I have *believed*, and I am *persuaded* that
he is *able to keep that which I have committed* unto him against that
day.

                                                      _II Timothy 1:12._

*To TAKE.*

AND the *Spirit* and the *bride say, Come*. And let him that *heareth
say, Come*. And let him that is *athirst come*....And *whosoever* will
*let* him *take* of the *water of life freely*.

                                                     _Revelation 22:17._

*To CONFESS.*

THAT if thou shalt *confess with thy mouth* the Lord Jesus, *and shalt
believe* in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, *thou
shalt be saved*. For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness;
and with the *mouth confession* is made unto salvation.

                                                       _Romans 10:9-10._

*To Be ACQUAINTED.*

ACQUAINT *now thyself with Him*, and be at peace; thereby good shall
come unto thee.

                                                            _Job 22:21._

*To FOLLOW.*

THEN shall we *know*, if we *follow* on to *know* the Lord: His going
forth is prepared as the morning; and He shall come unto us as the rain
. . . unto the earth.

                                                            _Hosea 6:3._

HE that followeth me *shall* not *walk* in *darkness*, but *shall* have
the *light of life*.

                                                            _John 8:12._

MY sheep hear my voice, and *I know them*, and they *follow me.*

                                                           _John 10:27._



                                Excuses.
                    *I can't understand the Bible.*


WHY can't you? Because the *carnal mind* can not understand divine truth
without the Spirit's teaching.

BUT the *natural man* receiveth not the things of the *Spirit of God*:
for they are *foolishness* unto him: neither can *he know them* because
they are *spiritually* discerned.

                                                   _I Corinthians 2:14._

MANY shall be purified, and made white, and tried; but the wicked shall
do wickedly; and *none of the wicked shall understand*; but the wise
shall understand.

                                                         _Daniel 12:10._

*Do God's will*, and you *can understand*.

IF any man *will do His will* he *shall know* of *the doctrine*, whether
it be of God, or whether I speak of myself.

                                                            _John 7:17._

*You ask, How may I KNOW?*

*1st. Pray.*

IF any of you lack wisdom, *let him ask* of God, that giveth to all men
liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

                                                            _James 1:5._

OPEN thou *mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things* out of *thy
law*.

                                                        _Psalms 119:18._

THAT which *I see not teach thou me*.

                                                            _Job 34:32._

*2nd. Study your Bible.*

SEARCH *the Scriptures*; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and
they are they which testify of me.

                                                            _John 5:39._

FOR *my thoughts are not your* thoughts, *neither are your your ways* my
ways, saith the Lord.

FOR as the heavens are higher than the earth, *so are my ways higher
than your ways*, and my thoughts than your thoughts.

                                                        _Isaiah 55:8-9._

THEN shall we know, *if we follow on* to know the Lord.

                                                            _Hosea 6:3._



                                Excuses.
                      *I can't see my way CLEAR.*


Listen to what *God says in His Word* and seek to follow *divine
instruction*, and you *will* see.

THEN spake Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world:
he that *followeth me shall not walk in darkness*, but *shall have* the
*light* of *life*.

                                                            _John 8:12._

TRUST in the Lord *with all thine heart*; and lean not unto thine own
understanding.

*In all thy ways acknowledge him, and* he shall *direct thy paths*. Be
not wise in thine own eyes: *fear the Lord, and depart from evil*.

                                                       _Proverbs 3:5-7._

IF the Son therefore shall make you free, *ye shall be free indeed*.

                                                            _John 8:36._

AND I will bring the *blind by a way that they knew not*; I will *lead*
them in *paths* that they have not *known*: *I* will make *darkness
light* before them, and *crooked things straight*. These things will I
do unto them, and not forsake them.

                                                         _Isaiah 42:16._

AND this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and
*men loved darkness* rather than light, *because their deeds were evil*.

                                                            _John 3:19._

BUT the *natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for
they are* foolishness unto him: *neither can he know them*, because they
are *spiritually discerned*.

                                                   _I Corinthians 2:14._

BUT as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for
them that love him. But God *hath revealed them* unto us *by his
Spirit*: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of
God.

                                                 _I Corinthians 2:9-10._

Illustration: Mark 9:20-29.



                                Excuses.
                        *My heart is TOO HARD.*


If you have a *hard heart*, that is just why you ought to come to Christ
because the Lord wants to give you a *new heart*.

A NEW heart also will I give you, and a *new* spirit will I put within
you: and I will *take away the stony heart* out of your flesh, and I
*will give you a heart of flesh*.

AND I will put *my spirit within you* and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.

                                                     _Ezekiel 36:26-27._

AND I will give them *one heart*, and will put a *new spirit within
you*; and *I will take* the stony heart out of their flesh, and will
give them an *heart of flesh*.

                                                        _Ezekiel 11:19._

IS not my word like as a fire? saith the Lord; and like a hammer that
*breaketh the rock in pieces*?

                                                       _Jeremiah 23:29._

LET the wicked *forsake his way*, and the *unrighteous man his
thoughts*: and let him *return unto the Lord*, and he will have mercy
upon him; and to our God, for he will *abundantly pardon*.

                                                          _Isaiah 55:7._

In this verse we find *three things* we must do.

1st. "Let the wicked forsake *his way*"

----(your part.)

2nd. "The unrighteous man *his thought.*"

---(your part.)

3rd. "*Let him return* unto the Lord"

---your part.)

Then God will do *two things, His part*

1st "He will have *mercy* upon him"--you!

2nd "He will *abundantly pardon*"--you!

COME now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord; though your sins
be *as scarlet*, they *shall be as white as snow*; though they be *red
like crimson, they shall be as wool*.

                                                          _Isaiah 1:18._

HIM that cometh to me, *I will in no wise cast out*.

                                                            _John 6:37._



                                Excuses.
                           *I am TOO YOUNG.*


IT is strange how any boy or girl should feel he or she is too young to
trust in the Saviour, when there is so much in the Bible to encourage
the children to come.

BUT Jesus said, *Suffer little children*, and forbid them not, to come
unto me: for *of such* is the kingdom of heaven.

                                                        _Matthew 19:14._

REMEMBER *now* thy Creator *in the days of thy youth*.

                                                    _Ecclesiastes 12:1._

I LOVE them that love me; and those that *seek me early shall find me*.

                                                        _Proverbs 8:17._

VERILY I say unto you, *Except* ye be *converted*, and become as *little
children*, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

                                                         _Matthew 18:3._

AND when he was *twelve years old*, they went up to Jerusalem after the
custom of the feast.

                                                            _Luke 2:42._

Here we read of Christ taking an active part in service for His heavenly
Father when *only twelve*.

AND that *from a child thou hast known* the holy Scriptures, which are
able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ
Jesus.

                                                       _II Timothy 3:15_

Here Paul says that Timothy *when only a child* knew the way of life
from the Scriptures.

BUT seek ye *first the* kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all
these things shall be added unto you.

                                                         _Matthew 6:33._

Seek the Kingdom "*first*," not after a part of your life has been
spent.

BEHOLD *now* is the *accepted time*; behold, *now is the day of
salvation*.

                                                   _II Corinthians 6:2._

Who will say, that an intelligent boy or girl reading this verse will
not understand it?



                                Excuses.
                  *I believe EVERY ONE will be SAVED.*


If you read your Bible carefully, you will find there are *some who will
not be saved*! Many of the parables teach this.

THEN said the king to the servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him
away, and *cast him into outer darkness*; there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.

                                                        _Matthew 22:13._

ENTER ye in at the straight gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the
way, that leadeth to destruction, and *many there be which go in
thereat*: Because straight is the gate, and narrow is the way, which
leadeth unto life, and *few there be that find it*.

                                                      _Matthew 7:13-14._

Here is a list of some who *will not he saved*.

Are *you* included in this list?

KNOW ye not that the *unrighteous* shall not inherit the kingdom of God?
Be not deceived; neither *fornicators*, nor *idolaters*, nor
*adulterers*, nor *effeminate*, nor *abusers* of themselves with
mankind, nor *thieves*, nor *covetous*, nor *drunkards*, nor *revilers*,
nor *extortioners*, shall inherit the kingdom of God.

                                                 _I Corinthians 6:9-10._

BUT the *fearful*, and *unbelieving* and the abominable, and murderers,
and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in
the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone; which is the second
death.

                                                      _Revelation 21:8._

FOR without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers,
and idolaters, and *whosoever loveth and maketh a lie*.

                                                     _Revelation 22:15._

THE *wicked shall be turned into hell*, and all the nations that forget
God.

                                                          _Psalms 9:17._

Illustration: Luke 16:19-31.



                                Excuses.
                  *It IS TOO LATE for me to be saved.*


There is not the slightest doubt but that Jesus *will forgive our sins*,
save and *keep* you, it you will *turn to him sincerely*.

ALL that the Father giveth me shall come to me: *and him that cometh to
me I will in no wise cast out*.

                                                            _John 6:37._

*Under no circumstances* will the Lord cast out a sincerely seeking
soul.

FOR *whosoever* shall call upon the name of the *Lord shall be saved*.

                                                         _Romans 10:13._

THE Lord is not slack concerning His promise, as some men count
slackness; but is *longsuffering* to usward, not *willing* that *any
should* perish, but that *all* should come to repentance.

                                                         _II Peter 3:9._

*COME now*, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins
*be as scarlet*, they shall be as *white as snow*; though they be *red
like crimson, they shall be as wool*.

                                                          _Isaiah 1:18._

Here the Lord is *reasoning with us* about the *worst* of our sins.

AND even to your old *age* I am he; and even to hoar hairs will I carry
you: I have made, and I will bear; even I will carry, and will deliver
you.

                                                          _Isaiah 46:4._

Here the promise reaches on to *old age*.

AND about the *eleventh hour* he went out, and found others standing
idle, and saith unto them, Why stand ye here all the day idle?

                                                         _Matthew 20:6._

Here the promise avails at the *eleventh hour of life*.

AND the Spirit and the bride *say, Come*. And let him that *heareth say,
Come*. And let him that is *athirst Come*. *And whosoever will*, let him
take the water of life freely.

                                                     _Revelation 22:17._

Heed this invitation and *come now*.

Illustration: John 4:7-30.



                                Excuses.
                  *DON'T TALK to me, or I will leave.*


If any one speaks to you, it is because they are *interested in you* and
want to help you.

They are trying to obey Gods command.

AND thou *shalt speak my words unto them*, whether they will hear or
whether they will forbear; for they are most rebellious.

                                                          _Ezekiel 2:7._

THOU therefore *gird up thy loins*, and *arise* and *speak* unto *them
all that I command thee*: be not *dismayed* at *their faces,* lest I
confound thee before them.

                                                        _Jeremiah 1:17._

See the punishment that awaits the *unfaithful Christian*.

WHEN I say unto the *wicked, Thou shalt surely* die; and thou *givest
him not warning*, nor speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way,
to save his life; the same *wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but
his blood will I require at thine hand.*  Yet if thou warn the wicked,
and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, *he shall
die in his iniquity*; but *thou hast delivered thy soul*.

                                                      _Ezekiel 3:18-19._

If a Christian has enough *interest in your soul* to *speak to you*, you
surely ought to have *some interest* in the *salvation* of your own
soul.

Listen to God's *warning*!

FOR the *wages* of sin is *death*; but the *gift* of God is *eternal
life* through Jesus Christ our Lord.

                                                          _Romans 6:23._

THE *wicked shall be turned into hell*, and *all* the *nations* that
*forget* God.

                                                          _Psalms 9:17._

BOAST not thyself of tomorrow, for thou *knowest not what a day may
bring forth*.

                                                        _Proverbs 27:1._

HE, that being often reproved *hardeneth* his *neck, shall suddenly* be
*destroyed*, and that *without remedy*.

                                                        _Proverbs 29:1._

Read: II Thessalonians 1:7-8.



                              Formalists.
               *One who trusts in FORMS and CEREMONIES.*


All of the following verses show plainly that we are not saved, by
"*forms*" or "ceremonies" but by "receiving and believing Christ as a
*personal Saviour*". Notice how each verse plainly states this.

Forms come after true faith.

BUT as many as *received Him* (Christ), to them gave he *power* to
*become* the *sons* of God, even to them that *believe* on *his name*.

                                                            _John 1:12._

FOR God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten Son, *that
whosoever believeth in Him* should not perish, but have *everlasting
life*.

                                                            _John 3:16._

VERILY, verily, I say unto you, he that heareth my word, and *believeth
on him* that sent me, HATH EVERLASTING LIFE, and shall not come into
condemnation; but is *passed* from death unto *life*.

                                                            _John 5:24._

HE that *hath the Son HATH* LIFE; and he that hath not the Son of God
hath not life.

                                                          _I John 5:12._

THAT if thou shalt *confess with thy mouth* the Lord Jesus, and *shalt
believe* in *thine heart* that God hath raised him from the dead, thou
SHALT BE SAVED.

                                                          _Romans 10:9._

FOR with the *heart man believeth* unto *righteousness*; and *with* the
*mouth confession* is made unto *salvation*.

                                                         _Romans 10:10._

Belief must be of the *heart* as well as head.

AND this is the record, that God *hath given* to us *eternal life*, and
this life *is* in *His Son*.

                                                          _I John 5:11._

EXAMINE yourselves, whether ye be *in the faith*.

                                                  _II Corinthians 13:5._

AND this is life eternal, that they might *know thee* the only true God,
and *Jesus Christ*, whom thou hast sent.

                                                            _John 17:3._



                                Giving.
              *(Systematically) ONE TENTH of your income.*


*God commands one tenth*.

WILL a man *rob God*? Yet ye have robbed me; But ye say, Wherein have we
robbed thee? *In tithes and offerings*.

YE are cursed with a curse: for *ye have robbed me*, even this whole
nation.

BRING ye *all* the *tithes* in the *storehouse*, that there may be meat
in mine *house*, and *prove me* now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts,
if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out *a
blessing*, that there *shall not be room enough to receive it*.

                                                       _Malachi 3:8-10._

*Who shall give*?

EVERY man shall give *as he is able, according to the blessing* of the
Lord thy God which he hath given thee.

                                                    _Deuteronomy 16:17._

*How much to give*?

AND of all that thou shalt give me I will surely give *the tenth unto
thee*.

                                                        _Genesis 28:22._

*The spirit with which to give*.

EVERY man according as he purposeth in his heart, so let him give; not
grudgingly, or of necessity: for God loveth a *cheerful giver*.

                                                   _II Corinthians 9:7._

*The time to give*.

UPON the *first day of the week* let everyone of you *lay by him in
store*, as God hath prospered him.

                                                   _I Corinthians 16:2._

*Does it pay to give one tenth*?

HONOUR the Lord with thy *substance*, and with the first-fruits of all
thine increase: So shall thy barns be *filled with plenty*, and thy
presses shall burst out with new wine.

                                                      _Proverbs 3:9-10._

*God returns 100 per cent*.

GIVE and *it shall be given unto you*; good measure, pressed down, and
shaken together, and running over, shall *men give into your bosom*.

                                                            _Luke 6:38._



                                 Hell.
               *God In UNJUST AND CRUEL to damn any one.*


Do you the creature, presume to criticize the Creator?

SHALL he that *contendeth* with the Almighty *instruct him*? he that
reproveth God, let him answer it.

                                                             _Job 40:2._

NAY but, O man, *who art thou that repliest against God*? Shall the
thing *formed* say to him that formed it, *Why hast thou* made me thus?

                                                          _Romans 9:20._

God has done all that a just God can do to provide man with salvation.

AS I live saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye
from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel?

                                                        _Ezekiel 33:11._

THE Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count
slackness; but is long-suffering to us-ward, *not willing that any
should perish*, but that all should come to repentance.

                                                          _II Peter 3:9_

FOR God so loved the world, (me) that He *gave His only begotten Son*,
that *whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting
life*.

                                                            _John 3:16._

O THE *depth of the riches* both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!

                                                         _Romans 11:33._

If you are lost at last, it will be because you *would not turn* from
your sins and receive Christ. Listen to His warning!

BE not deceived; God is not mocked: for *whatsoever* a man *soweth, that
shall he also reap*. For he that soweth to his *flesh shall* of the
flesh *reap corruption*; but he that soweth to the *Spirit shall of the
Spirit reap life everlasting*.

                                                      _Galatians 6:7-8._

*God damns* no one, man *damns himself*.



                                 Hell.
                            *A real PLACE.*


The word "hell" appears in the authorized version of the Bible 53 times.
In the "revised version" the word is translated "hades" 11 times out of
the 53.

If there is a "heaven" for the saved, sure there must be a "hell" for
the lost. The Bible speaks as clearly about one place as the other.

The Scriptures show hell a *real place*.

THE *wicked shall be turned into hell* and *all* the *nations* that
*forget God*.

                                                          _Psalms 9:17._

AND in hell he lifted up his eyes, being in (a summer resort? No.)
*torments*. . .

And he cried and said, . . . send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of
his finger in water and cool my tongue, *for I am tormented in this
flame*.

But Abraham said, son, remember. . . between us and you there is a great
gulf fixed: so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot;
neither can they pass to us that would come from thence.

                                                        _Luke 16:23-26._

THE Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of
his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity; And
shall cast them into a *furnace of fire*: there shall be wailing and
gnashing of teeth.

                                                     _Matthew 13:41-42._

AND whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast into
*the lake of fire*.

                                                     _Revelation 20:15._

AND I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
*bottomless pit* and a great chain in his hand.

                                                      _Revelation 20:1._

BUT thou, O God, shall bring them down into the *pit of destruction*.

                                                         _Psalms 55:23._

All the expressions, "hell", "furnace of fire," "lake of fire,"
"bottomless pit" and "pit of destruction" suggest a "*place*."



                                 Hell.
                        *CONDITION of the lost.*


BUT the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into *outer darkness*:
there shall be *weeping and gnashing of teeth*.

                                                         _Matthew 8:12._

AND shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the
hypocrites: there shall be *weeping and gnashing of teeth*.

                                                        _Matthew 24:51._

WHOSE fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and
will gather the wheat into his garner; but the *chaff he will burn with
fire unquenchable*.

                                                            _Luke 3:17._

AND the devil that deceived them was cast into *the lake of fire*, and
brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are and shall be
*tormented* day and night for ever and ever.

                                                     _Revelation 20:10._

And whosoever was not found written in the book of life *was cast into
the lake of fire*.

                                                     _Revelation 20:15._

HE that believeth on him is not condemned: but he that *believeth not is
condemned already*, because he hath not believed in the name of the only
begotten Son of God.

                                                            _John 3:18._

Men are *condemned* because of *unbelief* in Christ, and yet they say
"*no matter what you believe*," if you are only *sincere*.

BUT the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have
their part in the lake which *burneth with fire and brimstone*: which is
the second death.

                                                      _Revelation 21:8._

What words are all these? what a condition to be in throughout all
eternity!

There is *no ending* to eternity.

HE that believeth not shall be *damned*.

                                                           _Mark 16:16._

*HOW shall we escape* if we neglect?

                                                          _Hebrews 2:3._

WHO among us shall dwell with *everlasting burnings*?

                                                         _Isaiah 33:14._

AND these shall go away into *everlasting punishment*: but the righteous
into life eternal.

                                                        _Matthew 25:46._

WIDE is the gate, and broad is the way, that *leadeth to destruction*,
and *many* there be which go in thereat.

                                                      _Matthew 7:13-14._

WHERE their *worm dieth not*, and the *fire is not quenched*.

                                                            _Mark 9:48._

WOE unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass sea and
land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold
more *the child of hell* than yourselves.

                                                        _Matthew 23:15._

I ALSO will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear cometh;
When your fear cometh as *desolation*, and your *destruction cometh as a
whirlwind*; when distress and anguish cometh upon you.

                                                     _Proverbs 1:26-27._

THEN shall he say to them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed,
into *everlasting fire*, prepared for the devil and his angels.

                                                        _Matthew 25:41._

AND many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some
to everlasting life, and some to *shame* and *everlasting contempt*.

                                                          _Daniel 12:2._

HE that despised Moses' law *died without mercy* under two or three
witnesses: Of how much *sorer punishment*, suppose ye, shall he be
thought worthy, who hath *trodden under foot the Son of God*, and hath
counted the *blood of the covenant*, wherewith he was sanctified, an
unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit of grace?

                                                     _Hebrews 10:28-29._



                               Holiness.
               *Christ with In you SANCTIFYING the life.*


LET your light so shine before men, that they may see your *good works*,
and *glorify* your *Father* which is in *heaven*.

                                                         _Matthew 5:16._

LIKEWISE reckon ye also yourselves to be *dead indeed unto sin*, but
*alive unto God* through Jesus Christ our Lord.

                                                          _Romans 6:11._

LET not sin therefore *reign in your mortal body*, that ye should obey
it in the lusts thereof.

                                                          _Romans 6:12._

NEITHER yield ye your members instruments of unrighteousness unto sin:
but *yield yourselves unto God* as those that *are alive from the dead*,
and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God.

                                                          _Romans 6:13._

FOR sin *shall not have dominion* over you: for ye are not under the law
but under grace.

                                                          _Romans 6:14._

AND this I *pray*, that your *love* may abound yet more and more in
knowledge and in all judgment.

                                                      _Philippians 1:9._

*BEING filled with the fruits of righteousness*, which are by Jesus
Christ, unto the glory and praise of God.

                                                     _Philippians 1:11._

WHATSOEVER things are *true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report*; if there be any *virtue*,
and *if there* be any *praise*, think on these things.

                                                      _Philippians 4:8._

ABSTAIN from all *appearance* of *evil*.

                                                 _I Thessalonians 5:22._

THAT ye may *walk honestly* toward them that are without.

                                                 _I Thessalonians 4:12._



                              Holy Spirit.
                         *His WORK among men.*


*He draws*.

NO man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me *draw him*:
and I will raise him up at the last day.

                                                            _John 6:44._

*He convicts*.

AND when he is come, he will *reprove the world* of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment: Of sin, because they believe not on me.

                                                          _John 16:8-9._

*He Regenerates*.

NOT by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his
mercy he saved us, by the washing of *regeneration*, and *renewing of
the Holy Ghost*.

                                                            _Titus 3:5._

JESUS answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of
water *and of the Spirit*, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

                                                             _John 3:5._

*He teaches*.

HOWBEIT when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will *guide you into
all truth*: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall
hear, that shall he speak: and he will *shew* you things to come.

                                                           _John 16:13._

*He baptizes*.

NOW when the apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had
received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John:

Who, when they were come down, prayed for them, that they *might receive
the Holy Ghost*:

(For as yet he was fallen upon none of them: only they were baptized in
the name of the Lord Jesus.)

Then laid they their hands on them, *and they received the Holy Ghost*.

                                                         _Acts 8:14-17._

*He gives power for service*.

BUT ye shall *receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon
you*: and *ye* shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all
Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.

                                                             _Acts 1:8._

*He guides us*.

AND the angel of the Lord spake unto Philip, saying, Arise, and go
toward the south, unto the way that goeth down from Jerusalem unto Gaza,
which is desert. . . . Then the *Spirit said* unto Philip, *Go near*,
and join thyself to this chariot.

                                                        _Acts 8:26, 29._

THEN Peter, filled with the Holy Ghost, said unto them, Ye rulers of the
people, and elders of Israel, . . . Now when they saw the boldness of
Peter and John, and perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men,
they marvelled; and they took knowledge of them, that they had been with
Jesus.

                                                         _Acts 4:8, 13._

*Conditions of receiving the Spirit.*

*Obeying.*

AND we are his witnesses of these things; and so is also the Holy Ghost,
whom God hath given to them that *obey him*.

                                                            _Acts 5:32._

*Asking*.

IF ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children:
how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them
that *ask him*.

                                                            _Luke 11:13_

*Receiving*.

THEREFORE I say unto you, What things soever ye desire, when ye pray,
believe that ye *receive* them, and *ye shall have them*.

                                                           _Mark 11:24._



                              Hypocrites.
                       *Too many IN THE CHURCH.*


One usually finds that the person who sees the short comings in others,
before he sees his own, is the *real hypocrite*.

The word of God contains some very plain language addressed to *this
class* and they will do well to read it.

SO then every one of us shall give an account of *himself* to God.

                                                         _Romans 14:12._

THEREFORE *thou art inexcusable*, O man, whosoever thou art that
*judgest*: for wherein thou judgest another, *thou condemnest thyself*;
for thou that judgest *doest the same things*. . . . And *thinkest thou*
this, O man, that judgest them which do such things, and doest the same,
that thou *shalt escape the judgment of God*?

                                                        _Romans 2:1, 3._

BUT why dost thou judge thy brother? or why dost thou set at nought thy
brother? for we shall *all stand before the judgment seat of Christ*.
For it is written, As I live, saith the Lord, every *knee shall bow to
me, and every tongue shall confess to God*. So then everyone of us
*shall give account of himself to God*.

                                                      _Romans 14:10-12._

JUDGE *not, that ye be not judged*. For with what judgment *ye judge, ye
shall be judged*: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be *measured
to you again*. And why beholdest thou the mote that is *in thy brother's
eye*, but considerest not the beam that is in *thine own eye*? Or how
wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote *out of thine
eye*; and behold, a beam is in *thine own eye*? *Thou hypocrite, first
cast out the beam out of thine own eye*; and then shalt thou see clearly
to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye.

                                                        _Matthew 7:1-5._

If you are hiding behind a hypocrite you must be smaller than the person
behind whom you hide.

Even though there may be hypocrites in the church, that does not excuse
you. There are hypocrites in every other profession, but this is no
argument against the profession; nor is it any argument against Christ,
because a hypocrite is discovered in the church. You will not have to
answer for the sins of the hypocrite at the judgment *but for your own*.

BUT woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut up the
kingdom of heaven against men: for ye *neither go in yourselves, neither
suffer ye them that are entering to go in*.

                                                        _Matthew 23:13._

YE serpents, ye generations of vipers, *how can ye escape* the damnation
of hell?

                                                        _Matthew 23:33._

Read the 23rd Chapter of Matthew, and see how Christ condemned the
self-righteous critical crowd who watched the people turning to Christ.

He gave them a story that shows how he judges the two classes. Here it
is, read it!

TWO men went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, and the
other a publican. The *Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself*,
God, I *thank thee*, that I am not as other men are. . . . *I fast twice
in the week, I give tithes* of all that I possess. And the *publican,
standing afar off*, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven,
but smote upon his breast, saying, *God be merciful to me a sinner*. I
tell you, *this man* went down to his house justified rather than the
other.

                                                        _Luke 18:10-14._

Note-- One thing is certain, though hypocrites may be in the church here
on earth, *they will not enter heaven*. If you do not want to spend
eternity in hell with them, you had better become a Christian now.

Illustration: John 21:19-23



                                 Love.
                          *For your NEIGHBOR.*


A NEW commandment I give unto you, *that ye love one another; as I have
loved you*, that ye also love one another.

                                                           _John 13:34._

BY this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one
to another.

                                                           _John 13:35._

BUT as touching brotherly love ye need not that I write unto you: for ye
yourselves are taught of God to *love one another*.

                                                  _I Thessalonians 4:9._

BE kindly *affectioned one to another with brotherly* love; in honor
preferring one another.

                                                         _Romans 12:10._

SEEING you have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the
Spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that ye *love one
another with a pure heart fervently*.

                                                         _I Peter 1:22._

HE that *loveth his brother* abideth in the light, and there is no
occasion of stumbling in him.

                                                          _I John 2:10._

BELOVED, let us *love one another: for love is of God*; and every one
that *loveth is born of God*, and knoweth God.

                                                           _I John 4:7._

HE that *loveth not knoweth not God*; for God is love.

                                                           _I John 4:8._

BELOVED, if God so loved us, we *ought* also to *love one another*.

                                                          _I John 4:11._

OWE no man any thing, but to *love one another*: for he that loveth
another hath fulfilled the law.

                                                          _Romans 13:8._

FOR all law is fulfilled in one word, even in this; thou shalt *love thy
neighbor as thyself*.

                                                       _Galatians 5:14._

LET *brotherly love continue*.

                                                         _Hebrews 13:1._



                               Moralist.
                *Who trusts in his SELF RIGHTEOUSNESS.*


He who trusts in *his own* righteousness, trusts in a poor thing, God
compares it to "filthy rags."

BUT we are all an *unclean thing*, and all our *righteousnesses are as
filthy rags*; and we all do fade as a leaf; and our iniquities, like the
wind, have taken us away.

                                                          _Isaiah 64:6._

Because our righteousness in the sight of God, is no good. He has given
us a righteousness *in Christ*; but we, like the Jews, are trying to
establish our own, instead of finding it in Jesus.

FOR they being ignorant of God's rightness, *and going about to
establish their own righteousness*, have not submitted themselves unto
the righteousness of God.

FOR Christ is the end of the law *for righteousness* to every one that
*believeth*.

                                                        _Romans 10:3-4._

Many say, "*I am doing the best I can,*" and yet they are not, for if
they were, *they would accept Christ*, for this righteousness is
obtained by faith in Him.

EVEN the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all
and *upon all them that believe*.

                                                          _Romans 3:22._

JESUS saith unto him, I am the way, and the truth, and the life: *no man
cometh unto the Father, but by me*.

                                                            _John 14:6._

We can approach God only in Christ.

NEITHER is there salvation *in any other*: for there is *none other
name* under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.

                                                            _Acts 4:12._

Again, because our righteousness is of such a *poor brand*, Jesus
declared we must be "*born again*" so that we can have a nature that
will produce something better.

EXCEPT a man be *born again*, he cannot see the kingdom of God.

                                                             _John 3:3._



                               Moralist.
                *Who trusts In his GOOD WORKS to save.*


If the Scriptures make any thing *plain*, it is that man *can not save
himself* but must accept his salvation as a *gift*.

FOR by grace are ye saved through faith; and *that not of yourselves*;
it is the gift of God: *Not of works*, lest any man should boast.

                                                      _Ephesians 2:8-9._

WHO hath saved us, and called us with a holy calling, *not according to
our works*, but according to His own purpose and grace.

                                                       _II Timothy 1:9._

*NOT by works of righteousness* which we have done, but according to his
mercy he saved us, by the *washing of regeneration*, and renewing of the
Holy Ghost.

                                                            _Titus 3:5._

VERILY, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth *not by the door into
the sheepfold*, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a *thief and
a robber*.

                                                            _John 10:1._

Jesus Christ is *the door* as the next verse shows and he who tries to
save himself in any other way is called a "*thief*" and a "*robber*."

*I AM the door*: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall
go in and out, and find pasture.

                                                            _John 10:9._

JESUS said unto him, *Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart*, and *with all thy soul*, and *with all thy mind*. This is the
first and great commandment.

                                                     _Matthew 22:37-38._

Are you loving God with *all your heart*! If you were, you would *trust
Him*.

AND he said unto them, *Ye are they which justify yourselves before men;
but God knoweth your hearts*: for that which is highly esteemed among
men is abomination in the sight of God.

                                                           _Luke 16:15._

Are you an abomination in the sight of God because of what you do *in
your effort to save yourself*!

See: Luke 18:10-14.



                             Personal Work.
                        *Its Great IMPORTANCE.*


THE importance of personal work we cannot over estimate. It is the
method used by Jesus in His dealing with Nicodemus (John 3rd. Chap.),
The Woman at the Well (John 4th chap.), The Man at the Pool (John 5th
Chap. 18-19.). It was the method used by the Apostles and the early
church. It is the work needed *now* if many souls are to be reached.

THIS is an age of heart-to-heart methods, woman to woman and man to man,
reaching people in every line. The vast army of traveling salesmen used
by business houses, illustrates this method while the wonderful agency
system developed by the life insurance companies is a splendid example
of success coming from *personal work* and *personal contact*.

THE *Holy Spirit* will convict men and women of sin, but he needs human
help in reaching human hearts and inducing them to *act* after they are
convicted. Most people whom you and I know are already convicted and
convinced that they should be Christians. The great difficulty is to get
them to *do it now* and this is *your part*.

IN this day of such great activity and "strenuous" living there are so
many new things, as well as old, continually coming up that prevent
people from desiring or even thinking of spiritual life. Never was it
more true that we must *go out* into the *highways and compel them* to
come in. In revivals too much is left to "general results," until the
"old general" is sadly overworked. *The motto of* that wonderful and
effective organization of Christian business men, *the Gideons, is good
for all Christians*: "And they stood *every man* in *his place* round
about the camp."

IN a "general" way, you want to see your friends converted, why not help
the Lord answer your prayers by *aiding Him* in winning them one by one?

TRY to have some one *ready* to make *a public profession* when the
*evangelist gives the opportunity*.



                             Personal Work.
                        *QUALIFICATIONS needed.*


If we are going to lead souls to Christ, there are a few qualification
that we need.

*1st. A DEFINITE EXPERIENCE is needed. We must be able to say with
Paul.*

*I KNOW whom I have believed*, and am persuaded that *he is able to
keep* that which I have committed unto him against that day.

                                                      _II Timothy 1:12._

Or to exclaim with the blind man.

WHETHER he be a sinner or no, I know not: *one thing I know*, that,
whereas I was blind, *now I see*.

                                                             _John 9:25_

One who would have real success must he himself, or herself thoroughly
converted, and live a holy life. Just as the telegraph wire must be
insulated, before it can carry the electric message, so the Christian
must be insulated from his old life of sin, before he can carry the
gospel message to lost souls.

*2nd. A LOVE FOR SOULS needed.*

Paul's heart yearned for his brethren.

I HAVE great heaviness and continued sorrow in my heart. For I could
wish that myself *were accursed from Christ* for my brethren.

                                                         _Romans 9:2-3._

*3rd. A realization that SOULS ARE LOST, AND WE MAY be held RESPONSIBLE
FOR THEM*.

FOR what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and
*lose his own soul*?

                                                            _Mark 8:36._

WHEN I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shalt surely die; *if
thou dost not speak to warn the wicked* from his way, that wicked man
shall die in his iniquity; but *his blood will I require at thine hand*.

Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it; if he
do not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou hast
delivered thy soul.

                                                       _Ezekiel 33:8-9._

*4th. A WORKING KNOWLEDGE of the Bible is needed.*

It is God's word that is used by the Spirit in the saving of a soul, and
*not man's word*.

AND take the helmet of salvation, and the *sword of the Spirit*, which
is the word of God.

                                                       _Ephesians 6:17._

STUDY to *show thyself approved unto God, a workman* that needeth not to
be ashamed, *rightly dividing the word of truth*.

                                                      _II Timothy 2:15._

SO shall *my word* be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it shall not
return unto me void, but *it shall accomplish* that which I please, and
it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.

                                                         _Isaiah 55:11._

Through the use of the *word of God*, you are to seek to accomplish the
following things.

1st. To show men their *need* of a Savior.

2nd. To show them *Jesus* as the Savior they need.

3rd. To show them *how to make* this Savior their own.

4th. To meet the *difficulties* in the way of their accepting Christ.

5th. The one who would have *real success* must live a *life of prayer*,
and be *baptized* with the Holy Ghost.

Notice what the Lord is saying to us, to *encourage us* in our efforts
to save souls.

HE that *winneth souls is wise*.

                                                       _Proverbs 11:30._

AND they that be *wise shall shine* as the *brightness* of the
*firmament*; and they that turn *many* to *righteousness* as the *stars*
for *ever* and *ever*.

                                                          _Daniel 12:3._

LET him know, that he which *converteth the sinner* from the error of
his way shall *save a soul from death*, and shall hide a multitude of
sins.

                                                           _James 5:20._

God help us to be faithful to our trust!



                             Personal Work.
                     *The "soul-winner's" prayer.*


After having called attention to the qualifications required in personal
work there is a special need of emphasizing the fact that *faith in God*
and a constant waiting, *in prayer* on the Lord, are preeminently
necessary; in connection with the latter we suggest some of the things
*for which we need to pray*.

*1st. Pray*. "Lord give me "*getting up*" grace," that is, courage to
confess Christ.

*AND your feet shod* with the preparation of the gospel of peace.

                                                       _Ephesians 6:15._

*2nd. Pray*. "Lord give me *walking grace*."

IN *all* they ways *acknowledge Him*, and He shall *direct thy paths*.

                                                         _Proverbs 3:6._

*3rd. Pray*. "Lord *direct me* to the right person."

WHEN thou goest, *it* (God's word) *shall lead* thee. (First Clause.)

                                                        _Proverbs 6:22._

THEN the *Spirit* said unto Philip, *Go near and join* thyself to the
chariot.

                                                            _Acts 8:29._

*4th. Pray.* "Lord, show me *what to say*."

IF any of you *lack wisdom*, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men
liberally.

                                                            _James 1:5._

THE Lord God hath given me the *tongue* of the learned, *that I should
know how to speak a word in season* to him that is weary: He wakeneth
morning by morning, He wakeneth mine *ear* to *hear* as the learned.

                                                          _Isaiah 50:4._

THOU therefore *gird up thy loins*, and *arise*, and *speak* unto *them*
all *that I command thee*: be not dismayed at their faces, lest I
confound thee before them."

                                                        _Jeremiah 1:17._

*5th. Pray* that God will *give power to what is said*.

*Pray that God, will carry an the work after we are through.*



                             Personal work.
                      *Help in COTTAGE meetings.*


HELP work up the "Cottage Prayer Meetings" and endeavor to get some on
your list to attend with you.

When the campaign begins, personally invite those on your list and try
to get them to attend *every night*, always calling for and taking one
or more with you.

Study and pray about the best and most tactful ways to get the unsaved
to the meetings.

   1. Give them a timely *tract*.
   2. *Quote* to them a *beautiful promise*.
   3. Write them a *letter* about salvation.
   4. Introduce them to *someone* who will speak about Jesus.
   5. When opportunity is given, *speak to them* about becoming a
      Christian.
   6. *Go with them* to the inquiry room, altar or anxious seat.
   7. Ask them to your home and *pray with them there*.
   8. Help make every meeting you attend a good one by *some part you
      can take*.
   9. In public always be *brief* both in prayer and remarks.
  10. Have the mind and spirit of Christ with His words dwelling in you
      richly, and ever be *ready to answer the Spirit's call*.
  11. *Be true* to your own conscience.

Be not faithless. Let me name some of Satan's forces to defeat you at
this point;  *Timidity, Distrust, False Pride, and Fear of Giving
Offense*.

Many souls perish because of these. Do they hinder you? Ask for grace
and *let God sink* all these with your other *sins* into the *depth at
the sea*.



                             Personal Work.
                    *Use of the "PRAYER LIST" Card.*


*Pray for your friends*!

THERE are few people who do not have a special influence on at least one
other person. Make a list of twelve of your acquaintances--very
carefully and prayerfully.

BE careful for nothing; but in *every thing by prayer* and supplication
with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God.

                                                      _Philippians 4:6._

By so doing you will receive a blessing and see your friends saved.

DON'T wait until the meeting is nearly over, hoping they may get in on
the "tidal wave," or that the evangelist will "shake the tree" so hard
they can't hold on longer. But *pitch in* and do your *best*.
(*Hand-picked fruit always keeps better*.) Get them started early so
*they* can *work* for *others* during the revival meetings, and also
have the help of the meeting to establish their faith.

SHOULD others seem to be working on your list, *say* nothing but
tactfully co-operate and work with them.

As a rule select those of your own age and sex. Head your list with
*your own name* and then begin with the unsaved person you know and love
best, and most desire seeing saved. If all are not converted during the
meetings *follow them up afterwards until they are*. Add new names to
replace those who become converted and work this plan all the year, "in
season and out of season."

PRAY in private earnestly and aloud for each one by name at least twice
a day. *Study* how to bring the most helpful influence to bear on them.
Be very careful of your daily life before them and the world.

Keep your list confidential so that none but the Father and yourself
know the names you have. Don't be satisfied unless you see them
converted and in the church of *their* choice. Ever afterwards look upon
them as your *spiritual children*, assuming *responsibility* for
*keeping them from falling*.



                             Personal Work.


*1st. WHERE to Find Them.*

EVERYWHERE; by our side, in the *home*, in the *school, shop* and
*mill*; behind the *counter*, where we stand; on the *street*, where we
walk; in the *pew* where we worship; in the *service*, where we sing in
the *prayer meeting* and *inquiry room*, at the *altar*, kneeling with
us at *family* devotion; yes, *everywhere*. Oh, reader, whatever way
your eye shall turn, there stand the lost ones whom Jesus came to save.
Find them *quick, quick*! for eternity is drawing nigh.

*2nd. HOW to Reach Them*.

*YOU CAN WIN THEM BY LOVE*.

SAY "God give us hearts big enough to let Jesus and all our neighbors
in. Ask the spirit of God to be your guide, for there is an open window
to every soul. In many instances, they await your coming, for they have
no peace, as God says there is none for the wicked. Go to them in love
as Jesus would have gone, take His manner, choose His words. Go and
delay not. Here is where courage plays so great a part.

*3rd. WHAT to Tell Them*.

Tell them Jesus loves them. Everybody likes to hear good news.

FOR God so loved the world, (me) that He gave His only begotten Son,
that whosoever *believeth in Him* should not perish, but have
*everlasting life*.

                                                            _John 3:16._

TELL them that, for the gospel means nothing less. Who ever ran away
from glad tidings or messages of great joy?

Tell them the whole Gospel, "To-wit, that God was in Christ reconciling
the world unto Himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them; and
hath committed unto us the word of reconciliation . . . as though God
did beseech you by us; I pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to
God."

                                               _II Corinthians 5:19-20._



                             Personal Work.
                        *HINTS and SUGGESTIONS.*


WORKER'S life text: II Timothy 2:15.

Whatever your feeling of timidity in doing personal work, do not be
deterred by fear that you may give offense. Be *natural* and *courteous*
in asking the simple question as to personal salvation.

As far as possible converse only with *persons of your own age* or
younger, of *your own sex* and walk in life.

Always deal with the inquirer *alone* if you can and in quiet; if some
one intrudes, diverting his attention, kindly tell the intruder *to be
silent or withdraw*.

After a few words *to ascertain the state* of mind of the inquirer,
present the truth you think he needs from the Bible or this little book.

Depend not on your experience or ability to apply the *Word; "It is the
Spirit* that quickeneth."

Do not be in a hurry, *take time to be thorough*; some times in our
eagerness to see souls saved, we do not make the way plain.

*Let the Holy Spirit Himself show him* that when he has *believed on the
Lord Jesus Christ* he is at once saved.

If persons refuse, and seem to repulse you, *do not be dismayed* or
think that you have made a mistake; God often uses such refusals to
convict of sin and lead to repentance.

If a person baffles you with difficult questions, hand him over *to a
more experienced worker*.

Never advise an inquirer to go home and read his Bible, or pray, or try
to do better; this is *losing the present opportunity* with no promise
of a future or better one.

Affectionately urge *immediate* decision. *Pray with the inquirer*.

Be cautious; that which is a help to one may not be to another,
therefore "*rightly divide the Word of Truth*" And hold them *to what
God says* and the acceptance of Christ.



                             Personal Work.
                        *Suggestive Scriptures.*


When you come to Christ, does He accept or reject you?

AND him that cometh to me; *I will in no wise cast out*.

                                                            _John 6:37._

If you confess your sin to Him, what does He say he does with them?

IF we confess our sins, he is faithful and just *to forgive us our
sins,* and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

                                                           _I John 1:9._

TO him give all the prophets witness, that through his name *whosoever
believeth in him shall receive* remission of sins.

                                                           _Acts 10:43._

Who is it that has everlasting life?

*HE that believeth* on the Son hath everlasting llfe.

                                                            _John 3:36._

Do you believe? If so, have you life? You say, "I don't feel any
"different." It is not a matter of *feeling*, but of *believing*, see
how God puts the order of things.

IN whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the
gospel of your salvation: *in whom also after that ye believed, ye were
sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise*.

                                                       _Ephesians 1:13._

After you *believe*, God *seals* you. After you *commit yourself for
Christ* confessing Him as your Saviour, the *feeling comes*. Don't "get
the cart before the horse."

AND this is the *confidence that we have in him*, that, if we ask any
thing according to his will, he heareth us. And if we know that he hear
us, whatsoever we ask, *we know that we have the petitions that we
desired of him*.

                                                      _I John 5:14, 15._

GOD is not a man, *that he should lie*; neither the son of man, *that he
should repent*: hath he said, and *shall he not do it*? Or hath he
spoken, and *shall he not make it good*.

                                                        _Numbers 23:19._



                             Personal Work.
                  *Fruit promised to faithful effort.*


God has chosen us and sent us forth in His service promising fruit as
the result of our work. Christ came to save souls.

FOR the Son of Man is come to *seek* and to *save* that *which was
lost*.

                                                           _Luke 19:10._

YE have not chosen me, but I *have chosen you*, and ordained you, that
*ye* should GO *and bring forth fruit*, and *that your fruit should
remain*.

                                                           _John 15:16._

GO ye into *all the world* and preach the gospel to *every creature*.

                                                           _Mark 16:15._

AND the lord said unto the *servant*, GO *out into the highways and
hedges, and compel them to come in*, that my house may be filled.

                                                           _Luke 14:23._

AND he saith unto them, *Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men*.

                                                         _Matthew 4:19._

AND he that reapeth *receiveth wages*, and gathereth fruit unto life
eternal: that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice
together.

                                                            _John 4:36._

There are wages that come *now as we work*, and there is a *reward* that
will *come bye and bye*.

AND *let us not be weary* in well doing: for in due season we shall
reap, if we faint not.

                                                        _Galatians 6:9._

CAST thy bread upon the waters: for thou shalt find it *after many
days*.

                                                    _Ecclesiastes 11:1._

AND they that be wise shall *shine as the brightness of the firmament*;
and *they that turn many to righteousness* as the stars for ever and
ever.

                                                          _Daniel 12:3._

BEHOLD, I say unto you, *Lift up your eyes*, and look on the fields; for
they are *white already to harvest.*

                                                            _John 4:35._

LET him know, that he which *converteth the sinner* from the error of
his *way* shall *save a soul from death*, and shall hide a multitude of
sins.

                                                           _James 5:20._



                             Personal Work.
                        *FRUIT-BEARERS Chapter.*


The fifteenth chapter of John, is the "fruit Chapter," likening Christ
to the *vine*, and us to the *branches*; teaching us our need to abide
in Christ, if we would bring forth fruit and have power.

  1. I AM the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman.
  2. Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away: and every
     branch that *beareth fruit*, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth
     *more fruit*.

Are you bearing fruit, and purged?

  3. Now ye are *clean through the word* which *I* have spoken unto you.

The word cleanses the life, as the *knife* prunes the vine.

  4. Abide in me, and I In you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of
     itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye except ye abide
     in me.

Only as we abide in Christ, can we bear fruit.

  5. I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I in
     him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: *for without me ye can do
     nothing*.

We can not do, *even a little* without Christ.

  6. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is
     withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and
     they are burned.
  7. If ye abide in me, and my words *abide in you*, ye shall ask what
     ye will, and it shall be done unto you.

Note the condition in asking, "if ye abide."

  8. Here in is my Father glorified, that ye bear *much fruit*; so shall
     ye *be my disciples*.

                                                          _John 15:1-8._

In order to *bear fruit*, there must be in the Christian's life:
       1st "*cleansing*" (vs. 2-3.);
       2nd "*abiding*." (v. 4.);
       3rd "*obedience*" (v. 10.)

       1. "fruit" (v. 2.);
       2. "more fruit" (v. 2-10.);
       3. "much fruit" (v. 5; 8)



                             Personal Work.
             *For those who feel Too Weak and are Fearful.*


In all our work, God promises to maintain us, see His promises.

AND God is able to make *all grace abound toward you*; that ye, always
having *all sufficiency in all things*, may abound to every good work.

                                                   _II Corinthians 9:8._

AND he said unto me, My grace is *sufficient for thee*: for my strength
is made perfect in weakness.

                                                  _II Corinthians 12:9._

*STRENGTH for service.*

*FEAR thou not*: for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy God:
*I will strengthen thee*; yea, I will help thee; yea, *I will uphold
thee* with the right hand of my righteousness. . . . For I the Lord thy
God *will hold thy right hand*, saying unto thee, *Fear not*; I will
help thee.

                                                     _Isaiah 41:10, 13._

BE strong and of *a good courage*, fear not, nor *be afraid of them*:
for the Lord thy God, he it is that doth go with thee: *he will not fail
thee, nor forsake thee*.

                                                     _Deuteronomy 31:6._

Let us *wait on Him and prove* all of these promises!

HE giveth *power to the faint*; and to them that have no might *he
increaseth strength*. Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the
young men shall utterly fall: *But they that wait upon the Lord shall
renew their strength*; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they
shall run, and *not be weary*; and they shall *walk, and not faint*.

                                                      _Isaiah 40:29-31._

BUT my God shall *supply all your need* according to his riches in glory
by Christ Jesus.

                                                     _Philippians 4:19._

I CAN do *all things through Christ* which strengtheneth me.

                                                     _Philippians 4:13._

THOU therefore *endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ*.

                                                       _II Timothy 2:3._



                             Personal Work.
                       *A word to the unwilling.*


*God holds you RESPONSIBLE*.

*SO thou, O Son of man, I have set thee a watchman* unto the house of
Israel; therefore thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, *and warn them
from me*. When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shalt surely
die; If thou dost *not speak to warn* the wicked from his way, that
wicked man shall die in his iniquity; *but his blood will I require at
thine hand*.

                                                       _Ezekiel 33:7-8._

*The field is RIPE TO HARVEST.*

*SAY not ye*, There are yet four months and then cometh harvest? behold,
*I say unto you, Lift up your eyes, and look on the fields*; for they
are white already to harvest.

                                                         _John 4:35-36._

*Are you proving FAITHFUL*?

*THEREFORE be ye also ready*: for in such an hour as ye think not the
Son of man cometh. Who then is a *faithful and wise servant*, whom his
Lord hath made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due
season? *Blessed is that servant*, whom his Lord when he cometh shall
find so doing.

                                                     _Matthew 24:44-46._

I MUST work the works of him that sent me, *while it is day*: the *night
cometh*, when no man can work.

                                                             _John 9:4._

*CONSECRATE yourself to the work*?

I BESEECH you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye
*present your bodies a living sacrifice*, holy, acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable service.

                                                          _Romans 12:1._

*God is ENCOURAGING you, listen!*

AND they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament;
*and they that turn many to righteousness* as the stars forever and
ever.

                                                          _Daniel 12:3._



                               Pleasures.
                *Those who want to LIVE FOR THE WORLD.*


Count the cost friend, and see what God says concerning those who live
*just for worldly pleasures*. Will it pay?

*1st. You MAY NOT enjoy it ANOTHER DAY*!

BOAST *not thyself of tomorrow*; for thou knowest not what a day may
bring forth.

                                                        _Proverbs 27:1._

*2nd. You become the ENEMY OF GOD.*

YE adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the
world *is enmity with God*? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the
world is the enemy of God.

                                                            _James 4:4._

*3rd. You reap WHAT YOU SOW.*

BE not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, *that
shall he also reap*. For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh
reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit
reap life everlasting.

                                                     _Galatians 6:7, 8._

*4th. God calls you A FOOL.*

I WILL say to *my soul*, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up *for many
years*; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said unto
him, *Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee*.

                                                        _Luke 12:19-20._

*5th. God PLEADS with us.*

*TURN ye*, turn ye from your evil ways; for *why will ye die*, O house
of Israel?

                                                        _Ezekiel 33:11._

*6th. God warns us!*

This world with all that it has to offer, will soon *pass away* but he
that doeth the will of God "*abideth for ever.*"

KNOW thou, that *for all these things God will bring thee into
judgment*.

                                                     _Ecclesiastes 11:9_



                                Prayer.
                      *HEARD and ANSWERED by God.*


Prayer is the link that pulls down the power that blesses us and
everybody around.

What a glorious promise!

*CALL unto me*, and *I will answer thee*, and show thee great and mighty
things, which thou knowest not.

                                                        _Jeremiah 33:3._

AND all things *whatsoever* ye shall *ask in prayer believing, ye shall
receive*.

                                                        _Matthew 21:22._

Examine your heart and see if you have faith, God is willing if you can
believe Him.

THEREFORE I say unto you, *What things soever ye desire*, when ye *pray,
believe* that ye receive them, and ye *shall have them*.

                                                            _Mark 11:24_

*IF ye abide in me*, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye
will, and it shall be done unto you.

                                                             _John 15:7_

With all of God's promises there are conditions, Here we have one. "If
ye abide in me." Are you abiding in Him?

AND this is the confidence that we have in him, that, if *we ask any
thing according to his will*, he heareth us: And if we know that he hear
us, whatsoever we ask, *we know that we have the petitions* that we
desired of him.

                                                       _I John 5:14-15._

AND whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that *will I do*, that the
Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask anything in my name,
*I will do it*.

                                                        _John 14:13,14._

If you want God's answer to prayer, remember the conditions.

*AND whatsoever we ask, we receive of him*, because we *keep his
commandments*, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight.

                                                           _I John 3:22_



                                Prayer.
                       *VICTORY through prayer.*


CALL unto me, and I will answer thee, and show thee great and mighty
things.

                                                        _Jeremiah 33:3._

AND it shall come to pass, that *before they call, I will answer*; and
while they are *yet speaking, I will hear.*

                                                         _Isaiah 65:24._

CONFESS your faults one to another, and *pray one for another*, that ye
may be healed. . . . Elias was a man subject to *like passions as we
are*, and *he prayed* earnestly that it might not rain: *and it rained
not* on the earth by the space of three years and six months. And *he
prayed again*, and the *heaven gave rain*, and the earth brought forth
her fruit.

                                                        _James 5:16-18._

Remember that prayer is not mere petition, but communion, pouring out
the whole soul to God. *Prayer is the golden key that unlocks all* the
*storehouse: of God's grace; they are opened by men and women on their
knees*. There is little danger of too much time being spent in prayer.
Bad habits are overcome by prayer; evil thoughts and tendencies are
rooted out by prayer; dark hours are made light by prayer; midnight of
prayer brings noonday and victory. "True prayer is the reflection of
God's thoughts back upon Himself, therefore to get God's thoughts and
pray in the spirit, I would pray over my Bible." Form the habit of
prayer immediately on awakening in the morning, Make Daniel and David
the rule of life. Form habit of praying whenever doubt, difficulty,
temptation, or trial arises, any hour of the day or night.

IF my people, which are called by my name, *shall humble themselves* and
pray, and *seek my face*, and turn from their wicked ways; then will I
hear from heaven, and *will forgive their sin, and will heal their
land*.

                                                   _II Chronicles 7:14._



                                Prayer.
                     *REGULAR seasons for prayer.*


NOW, when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his
house; and his windows being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem, *he
kneeled down upon his knees three times a day and prayed and gave
thanks* before his God, as he did aforetime.

                                                          _Daniel 6:10._

*EVENING*, and *morning*, and at *noon, will I pray, and cry aloud*: and
*He shall hear my voice*.

                                                         _Psalms 55:17._

PRAY without *ceasing*.

                                                 _I Thessalonians 5:17._

Practice the following verses:

MY voice shalt thou hear *in the morning*, O Lord; in the *morning will
I direct my prayer* unto thee, and will look up.

                                                           _Psalms 5:3._

*WATCH and pray*, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed
is willing, but the flesh is weak.

                                                        _Matthew 26:41._

Be continually in the Spirit of prayer.

*PRAYING always with all Prayer* and supplication in the Spirit, and
watching there unto with all perseverance and supplication for all
saints.

                                                       _Ephesians 6:18._

BUT they that *wait upon the Lord* shall renew their strength; they
shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary;
and they shall walk, and not faint.

                                                         _Isaiah 40:31._

Where do you Pray?

I WILL therefore *that men pray every where*, lifting up holy hands.

                                                        _I Timothy 2:8._

AND he spake a parable unto them to this end, that *men ought always to
pray*, and not to faint.

                                                            _Luke 18:1._

BE careful for nothing; but *in every thing by prayer* and supplication
with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God.

                                                      _Philippians 4:6._



                                Prayer.
                   *CONDITIONS In answer to prayer.*


*You must ASK!*

ASK, and it *shall* be given you; *seek*, and ye shall find. *Knock*,
and it shall be *opened unto you*.

                                                          _Matthew 7:7._

*You must BELIEVE!*

THEREFORE I say unto you, *What things soever* ye *desire*, when ye
*pray, believe* that ye *shall* receive them, and *ye shall have them*.

                                                           _Mark 11:24._

*You must be WILLING TO FORGIVE.*

AND when ye stand praying, *forgive, if ye have ought against any*: that
your Father also which is in heaven *may forgive you* your trespasses.
*But if ye do not forgive*, neither will your Father which is in heaven
forgive your trespasses.

                                                        _Mark 11:25,26._

*You must have a CLEAN HEART.*

IF I *regard iniquity* in my heart, the Lord will not hear me:

                                                         _Psalms 66:18._

*Must be UNSELFISH.*

YE ask, and receive not, because *ye ask amiss*, that ye may *consume it
upon your lusts*.

                                                            _James 4:3._

*Must DO HIS WILL.*

AND this is the *confidence that we have in him*, that, *if we ask
anything according* to *his will*, he *heareth us*.

                                                          _I John 5:14._

*You must be GUIDED BY HIS WORD.*

IF ye *abide* in *me*, and my *words abide in you*, ye *shall ask what
ye will*, and it *shall* be done unto you.

                                                            _John 15:7._

*You must ASK IN HIS NAME.*

VERILY, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father *in
my name*, he will give it you.

                                                           _John 16:23._

WHATSOEVER ye shall ask of the Father *in my name*, he may give it you.

                                                           _John 15:16._



                    Regeneration, or the New Birth.
                       *RESULTS of Regeneration.*


*The result of the new birth is a new heart, a new mind, a new nature, a
new love for God and His people.*

*1st. A NEW heart.*

A NEW heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within
you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will
give you a heart of flesh.

                                                        _Ezekiel 36:26._

*2nd. Passing FROM DEATH to life.*

*VERILY, verily*, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth
on him that sent me, *hath everlasting life*, and shall not come into
condemnation; *but is passed from death unto life*.

                                                            _John 5:24._

*3rd. Putting on a NEW MAN.*

AND that ye put on *the new man*, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness.

                                                       _Ephesians 4:24._

*4th. Created ANEW, not made over.*

THEREFORE if any man be in Christ, *he is a new creature*: old things
are passed away; Behold, all things are become new.

                                                  _II Corinthians 5:17._

*5th. Washed white, not white-washed*.

NOT by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his
mercy he saved us, by the *washing of regeneration*, and *renewing* of
the Holy Ghost.

                                                            _Titus 3:5._

*6th. VICTORY over sin.*

*WHOSOEVER is born of God doth not commit sin*.

                                                           _I John 3:9._

*7th. Translated into a KINGDOM.*

WHO hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath *translated
us into the kingdom* of his dear Son.

                                                      _Colossians 1:13._

*8th. Created to be useful (workers).*

FOR we are his workmanship, *created in Christ Jesus unto good works*.

                                                       _Ephesians 2:10._

Because we are born with an *earthly* nature and are sinners against
God, we must have a heavenly nature, to be happy with God.

It is the *carnal nature* that sins. it is the *God nature* that does
not sin.

JESUS answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
*except a man be born again*, he cannot see the kingdom of God.

                                                             _John 3:3._

THAT which is born of the *flesh* is *flesh*; and that which is *BORN of
the Spirit* is spirit. Marvel not that I said unto thee, YE MUST BE BORN
AGAIN.

                                                           _John 3:6-7._

*Have YOU been born of the Spirit?*

It you are not *sure, read* the following Scriptures as they may assure
you, or show you how you *may be regenerated*.

WHOSOEVER *believeth that Jesus is the Christ* is born of God.

                                                           _I John 5:1._

BUT as many as *received him*, to them gave he power to become the *sons
of God*, even to them that *believe* on his name: which were born, not
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, *but of
God*.

                                                          _John 1:12-13_

*BEING born again*, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, *by
the word of God*, which liveth and abideth for ever.

                                                          _I Peter 1:23_

WHEREBY are given unto us exceeding great and *precious promises*: that
*by these* ye might be partakers of the *divine nature*, having escaped
the corruption that is in the world through *lust*.

                                                         _II Peter 1:4._

THIS is my comfort in my affliction: for *thy word hath quickened me*.

                                                         _Psalms 119:50_

FOR in Christ Jesus I have *begotten you through the gospel*.

                                                   _I Corinthians 4:15._

If you would know more regarding this subject see next page.



                              Repentance.
            *A requisite for Salvation, what does it mean?*


What is the meaning of repentance? In the greek, the word means a change
of mind, such as leads one to *confess all his sins, forsake* them and
*turn* to God.

THE time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: *repent ye*,
and believe the gospel.

                                                            _Mark 1:15._

THEN Peter said unto them, *Repent, and be baptized* every one of you in
the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive
the gift of the Holy Ghost.

                                                            _Acts 2:38._

Have you repented, and are you ready for the blessing God has for you?

*REPENT ye therefore*, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted
out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the
Lord.

                                                            _Acts 3:19._

God is commanding us to repent.

AND the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now *commandeth all
men every where to repent*.

                                                           _Acts 17:30._

AND they went out, and preached that *men should repent*.

                                                            _Mark 6:12._

AND that *repentance* and remission of sins should be preached in his
name among all nations.

                                                           _Luke 24:47._

*EXCEPT ye repent* ye shall all likewise perish.

                                                            _Luke 13:3._

*REPENT ye*: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

                                                          _Matthew 3:2._

I CAME not to call the righteous, *but sinners to repentance*.

                                                            _Luke 5:32._

Does this verse mean *you*?

BUT shewed first unto them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout
all the coast of Judaea, and then to the Gentiles, *that they should
repent and turn to God*, and do works meet for repentance.

                                                           _Acts 26:20._

If you have not repented, do so at once.

Read: Jeremiah 3:13; Ezekiel 18:30-32.



                             Revival, The.
                      *How to make it a success.*


  - Be a prayerful christian.
  - Always be on time.
  - Ask God to help you sing.
  - Make it a point to attend every meeting.
  - Do not quench the Spirit.
  - Be ready to obey at God's calling.
  - When you come, look, as though you enjoyed the religion you profess.
  - Shake hands as though it were not a dead fish tail but as if it were
    a pleasure.
  - Always be prompt when others are slow in testifying.
  - Watch for those who raise a hand and are convicted, and follow them
    up and lead them to Christ.
  - Make it a point to invite your friends to attend the meeting, and
    accept Christ.
  - When you come to the meeting, don't find fault with the evangelist
    or the preacher's methods. Ask yourself the question "if all the
    church members were like me, would this revival be a success?"
  - Make it a business at the close of each meeting to speak to some one
    about seeking Christ.
  - Always pray before the meeting and for your friends, that you may be
    able some way to lead them to Christ.

                                  ----

                      _*How to Hinder a Revival.*_

  - Never pray. If you did, it might help some one.
  - Always make a long prayer.
  - Then you come, be sure to take a back seat and stay there.
  - If you do pray, pray at the evangelist and the people and not for
    them.
  - Never bow your head when others are praying for if you did, they
    would think you might be interested.
  - If you shake hands, do it as though it were an awful cross to you.
  - Be sure that you keep account of what the preacher says and then rip
    him up the back.

I would suggest to read this over every day and see which of these
things you are doing. If you are a christian and found doing some of
these things above and hindering a revival in which you might use your
influence in saving somebody else, ask yourself this question--if all
the church members were like me what kind of a church would my church
be?



                             Revival, The.
                         *What to bring to It.*


   1. Bring your own Bible; every work man prefers his own tools.
   2. Bring the topic--in your memory, not on the card.
   3. Bring some matured thought on the theme--from your Bible study.
   4. Bring the best illustration or application of the theme you have
      found in your reading or other research.
   5. Bring some wish, aspiration, sense of need--sated appetites are
      the hardest to cater to.
   6. Bring your attention: a wandering mind never wanders to God.
   7. Bring your sympathies; give more than you expect to get, and you
      will get more than you expect.
   8. Bring your smiles and cheerful looks and emphasize the *beauty* of
      holiness.
   9. Bring your friend, or a stranger. How easy to increase the
      attendance by a few personal invitations!
  10. Bring a large expectation, and God will fill it.



                       Ridicule and Persecution.
                     *My friends will LAUGH at me.*


The person who would ridicule you for being a Christian, is not your
friend.

WHOSOEVER therefore shall *be ashamed of me* and of my words in this
adulterous and sinful generation; *of him also* shall the *Son of man be
ashamed*, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy
angels.

                                                            _Mark 8:38._

FOR whosoever will save his life shall lose it; but whosoever *shall
lose his life for my sake and the gospel's*, the same shall save it.

                                                            _Mark 8:35._

BLESSED are they which are *persecuted for righteousness' sake*: for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall *revile
you, and persecute you*, and shall say all manner of evil against you
falsely, for my sake. *Rejoice, and be exceeding glad*: for great is
your *reward in heaven*: for so persecuted they the prophets which were
before you.

                                                      _Matthew 5:10-12._

IF ye *be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye*; for the
spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you: on their part he is evil
spoken of, but on your part he is glorified.

                                                         _I Peter 4:14._

FOR unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on
him, but also *to suffer for his sake*.

                                                     _Philippians 1:29._

Think of the reward that Christ has promised to those who suffer for
Him.

AND if children, then heirs: heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ;
*if so be that we suffer with him*, that we may be also glorified
together.

                                                          _Romans 8:17._

FOR I reckon that *the sufferings* of this present time are not worthy
to be *compared* with the glory *which shall be revealed in us*.

                                                          _Romans 8:18._



                       Ridicule and Persecution.
                       *Encouragement given us.*


*Christ was PERSECUTED FOR US!*

FOR what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall
take it patiently? but if *when ye do well and suffer for it, ye take it
patiently*, this is acceptable with God.

For even hereunto were *ye* called, because *Christ also suffered for
us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps*.

                                                     _I Peter 2:20, 21._

LOOKING unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith; who for the joy
that was set before him *endured the cross, despising the shame*, and is
set down at the right hand of the throne of God.

                                                         _Hebrews 12:2._

It you will notice the Scripture you will see that Paul had some
persecutions, but out of them all God delivered him. Will he not deliver
us? Yes surely He will.

THEREFORE, I take pleasure in infirmities, *in reproaches, in
necessities, in persecutions*, in distress for Christ's sake: for when I
am weak, *then am I strong*.

                                                 _II Corinthians 12:10._

*ENCOURAGEMENT given us to suffer.*

AND they departed from the presence of the council, *rejoicing chat they
were counted worthy* to suffer shame for his name.

                                                            _Acts 5:41._

BUT and if *ye suffer for righteousness' sake, happy are ye*: and be not
afraid of their terror, neither be troubled.

                                                         _I Peter 3:14._

YET *if any man suffer* as a Christian, let him not be ashamed; but let
him glorify God on this behalf. . . . Wherefore, *let them that suffer*
according to the will of God commit the keeping of their souls to him in
well doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

                                                     _I Peter 4:16, 19._



                          Sabbath and Sunday.
                  *HOW a Christian should HALLOW IT.*


God has always commanded his people give to him one day out of seven.

*REMEMBER the sabbath day, to keep it holy*. Six days shalt thou labour,
and do all thy work: But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy
God: *in it thou shalt not do any work*, thou, nor thy son, nor thy
daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle nor thy
stranger that is within thy gates.

                                                       _Exodus 20:8-10._

AND if the people of the land bring *ware or any victuals on the sabbath
day to sell*, that we would not buy it of them on *the sabbath day*.

                                                       _Nehemiah 10:31._

THIS is *the day* which the Lord hath made; we will rejoice and be glad
in it.

                                                        _Psalms 118:24._

How do you treat the Lords day?

THOU hast despised mine holy things, and *hast profaned my sabbaths*.

                                                         _Ezekiel 22:8._

Have you profaned God's holy day by going to excursions, and using it to
meet your selfish ends?

*Note the example of Christ and His Church*.

They went to the synagogue, so let us go to Church.

AND he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up: and, as his
custom was, *he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day*, and stood
up for to read.

                                                            _Luke 4:16._

AND he reasoned in the synagogue *every sabbath*.

                                                            _Acts 18:4._

I WAS *in the Spirit on the Lord's day*.

                                                      _Revelation 1:10._

LET no man therefore judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of an
holy day, or of the new moon, or of the *Sabbath day* which are a
*shadow* of things to come; but the *body is Christ's*.

                                              _Colossians 2:16-17, R.V._

*God forbids worldly pleasure on His Day.*

IF thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on
my holy day; and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord,
honourable; and shalt honour him, *not doing thine own ways*, nor
finding *thine own pleasure*, nor speaking thine own words:

Then shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord; and I will cause thee to
ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage
of Jacob thy father: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.

                                                      _Isaiah 58:13-14._

*Commands divine worship.*

LIKEWISE the people of the land shall worship at the door of this gate
be for the Lord *in the sabbaths and in the new moons*.

                                                          _Ezekiel 46:3_

*Required His word to be read.*

FOR they that dwell at Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they knew
him not, nor yet the voices of the prophets which are *read every
sabbath day*, they have fulfilled them in condemning him.

                                                           _Acts 13:27._

*The Lords Supper to be observed.*

AND upon the *first day of the week*, when the disciples came together
to *break bread, Paul preached unto them*, ready to depart on the
morrow; and continued his speech until midnight.

                                                            _Acts 20:7._

---Carefully abstain from all but spiritual conversation "not speaking
thine own words."

Strive to be "in the Spirit on the Lord's Day," "not doing thine own
ways."

Do no work on the Sabbath Day that is not necessary.

"Have at least a Sabbath hour in every day as well as a Sabbath day in
every week."



                               Salvation.
                  *To WHOM offered? "Whosoever will!"*


Notice the different classes to whom *salvation is offered*.

*1st To the WEARY AND HEAVY- LADEN.*

COME unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, *and I will give
you rest*. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and
lowly in heart: *and ye shall find rest unto your souls, For my yoke is
easy*, and *my burden is light*.

                                                     _Matthew 11:28-30._

*2nd. To the HUNGRY and thirsty.*

*HO, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters*, and he that hath
no money: come ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, *buy wine and milk without
money* and without price.

                                                          _Isaiah 55:1._

*3rd. To sinners.*

BUT God commendeth his love toward us, in that, *while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us*.

                                                           _Romans 5:8._

THIS is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ
Jesus came into the world *to save sinners; of whom I am chief*.

                                                       _I Timothy 1:15._

*4th. To the LOST.*

FOR the Son of man is *come to seek and save that which was lost*.

                                                           _Luke 19:10._

*5th. Whosoever WILLS to come.*

AND the Spirit and the bride *say, Come*. And let him that *heareth say,
Come*. And let him that is *athirst come*. *And whosoever will*, let him
take the water of life freely.

                                                     _Revelation 22:17._

God has done His part in giving His son to die for our sins; will you do
your part? and come honestly and confess your sins?

IF we confess our sins, *he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins*, and to *cleanse us* from all unrighteousness.

                                                           _I John 1:9._



                               Salvation.
                     *Offered to the MOST sinful.*


COME now, and let us *reason together*, saith the Lord: *though your
sins be as scarlet*, they shall be as *white* as *snow*; though they be
*red like crimson*, they *shall be as wool*.

                                                          _Isaiah 1:18._

AND the spirit and the *bride* say Come. . . . And let him that is
*athirst come*. And *whosoever* will, let him take of the water of life
*freely*.

                                                     _Revelation 22:17._

WHEREFORE He is *able* also *to save them to the uttermost*.

                                                         _Hebrews 7:25._

IF *we confess our sins*, He is faithful and *just to forgive us our
sins*, and *to cleanse us* from all unrighteousness.

                                                           _I John 1:9._

FOR the Son of man is come to *seek* and to *save* that which was lost.

                                                           _Luke 19:10._

No one can say, "I am too great a sinner, Christ cannot save me."

*God says He has BLOTTED OUT our sins.*

*I HAVE blotted out*, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a
cloud, *thy sins*: return unto me; for I have redeemed thee.

                                                         _Isaiah 44:22._

I EVEN I, am he that *blotteth out thy transgressions* for mine own
sake, and will not remember thy sins.

                                                         _Isaiah 43:25._

MY little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. *And
if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father*, Jesus Christ the
righteous: And he is the *propitiation for our sins*: and not for ours
only, but also for the sins of the whole world.

                                                         _I John 2:1-2._

*FOR whosoever shall call* upon the name of the *Lord shall be saved*.

                                                         _Romans 10:13._

If any one "*wills*" to call upon the Lord, he is sure to be heard, and
the Lord will save.



                               Salvation.
             *Saved alone by FAITH, Lost through UNBELIEF.*


*1st. Saved alone BY FAITH in Christ.*

VERILY, verily, I say unto you, He that *believeth* on me hath
*everlasting life*.

                                                            _John 6:47._

*BELIEVE* on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.

                                                           _Acts 16:31._

TO him give all the prophets witness, that through his name *whosoever
believeth in him* shall receive remission of sins.

                                                           _Acts 10:43._

AND by him all that *believe are* justified from all things, from which
ye could not be justified by the law of Moses.

                                                           _Acts 13:39._

*2nd. Lost because of UNBELIEF.*

HE that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that *believeth
not shall be damned*.

                                                           _Mark 16:16._

HE that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that
*believeth not the Son* shall not see life; but the *wrath of God
abideth on him*.

                                                            _John 3:36._

HE that believeth on Him (Jesus) is not condemned: but he that
*believeth not is CONDEMNED already*.

                                                            _John 3:18._

NEITHER is there salvation *in any other*: for there is *none other
name* under heaven given among men, whereby *we* must be saved.

                                                            _Acts 4:12._

JESUS saith unto him, I am the way, and the truth, and the life: *no man
cometh unto the Father, but by me*.

                                                            _John 14:6._

VERILY, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the door into
the sheepfold, *but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and
a robber*.

                                                            _John 10:1._

*3rd. Seek Jesus to-day.*

*REPENT ye*: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

                                                          _Matthew 3:2._



                               Salvation.
                     *What must I do to be saved?*


MAY the Holy Spirit make these few words in answer to this great
question, *so plain* that you will be able to say, "*I see it,*" and I
will *now believe*!

You ask, "What must I do to be saved?"

*BELIEVE* on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy
house.

                                                           _Acts 16:31._

FOR *whosoever shall call* upon the name of the Lord *shall be saved*.

                                                         _Romans 10:13._

*VERILY, verily*, I say unto you, *he* that *heareth My Word*, and
*believeth* on Him (God) that sent Me (Christ), *hath everlasting* life,
and shall not come into judgment, but *hath passed out of death into
life*.

                                                _John 5:24, A.V. & R.V._

*HE that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life*: and he that
believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth
on Him.

                                                            _John 3:36._

Your salvation depends upon what *you do with Jesus Christ. Accept* Him
and you are saved--*reject* Him and you are lost.  Thus saith the
Scriptures!

BEGIN the Christian life in a humble and trusting way, as the child
begins with the alphabet at school. Don't look for marvels. Don't expect
to see visions. Believe that the Spirit of Christ will come into your
heart, and cause you to love God and delight in His will; not because
you may feel happy, but because you are definitely trusting Him to do
what He has promised to do. If you will forsake your sins, He says He
will blot them out and give you His Holy Spirit. Believe the Word of the
Lord, because it is His word, and He cannot lie. He says He will help
you to bear your troubles. Trust Him and try Him. He says He will give
you strength for labor; courage for conflict; the power to resist
temptation, and grace sufficient for every day. Take Him at His word and
you will soon know for yourself how blessed it is to trust and obey.

*1st. Receive Christ as a Saviour.*

BUT as many as *received Him* (Christ), to *them gave* he *power* to
*become* the *sons* of *God*, even to them that *believe on his name*.

                                                            _John 1:12._

*2nd. Confess Christ before men.*

WHOSOEVER therefore shall *confess me before men*, him will I confess
also before my Father which is in heaven.

                                                        _Matthew 10:32._

IF thou shalt *confess with thy mouth* the Lord Jesus, and shalt
*believe in thine heart* that God hath raised him from the dead, *thou
shalt be saved*.

For with the *heart* man believeth unto righteousness; and with the
*mouth* confession is made unto salvation.

                                                       _Romans 10:9-10._

The "*If*" at the beginning of this last Scripture suggests *two*
conditions.

1st. To "*confess*," that is, *make known* with your mouth the Lord
Jesus.

2nd. To "*believe*," that is, *really mean it* in your heart.

If you meet these conditions God's word says, "*thou shalt be saved*".
Our feelings are *not to be depended upon*.

*3rd. OBEY Christ in the life*.

HE *that hath my commandments, and keepeth them*, he it is that loveth
me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love
him, and *will manifest myself to him*.

                                                           _John 14:21._

The first two steps you can take in a moment. The third step will
require all your life to live it.

All who will decide to trust in Christ *now*, pray with me this prayer:
"Lord Jesus I come to thee *just as I am*, and take thee at thy word;
wash away all my sins, and give me thy Holy Spirit to help me to trust
thee always, and do thy will in all things, for Jesus sake. Amen!"



                               Salvation.
                      *Proofs that we are saved.*


THE Spirit itself *beareth witness with our spirit*, that we are the
children of God.

                                                          _Romans 8:16._

AND this is the record, that God *hath given* to us *eternal life*, and
this life is in his Son.

                                                          _I John 5:11._

HE that *hath* the Son *hath life*; and he that hath not the Son of God
hath not life.

                                                          _I John 5:12._

NOW he that hath wrought us for the self-same thing is God, who also
hath given unto us *the earnest of the Spirit*.

                                                   _II Corinthians 5:5._

WHO hath also sealed us, and given the earnest of the *Spirit in our
hearts*.

                                                  _II Corinthians 1:22._

AND grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby *ye are sealed* unto the
day of redemption.

                                                       _Ephesians 4:30._

AND because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the *Spirit of his Son into
your hearts*, crying, Abba, Father.

                                                        _Galatians 4:6._

AND he that keepeth his commandments dwelleth in him, and he in him. And
hereby we know that he abideth in us, *by the Spirit which he hath given
us*.

                                                          _I John 3:24._

NOT by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his
mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, *and renewing of the
Holy Ghost*.

                                                            _Titus 3:5._

HEREBY know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, *because he hath
given us of his Spirit*.

                                                          _I John 4:13._

IN whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the
gospel of your salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye were
sealed *with that Holy Spirit of promise*.

                                                       _Ephesians 1:13._



                            Scriptures, The.
                        *Given by inspiration.*


Men who wrote the Bible, believed it to be the word of God.

Ezekiel, the Prophet, believed them.

AND the *word of the Lord came unto me*, saying.

                                                    _Ezekiel 12:21, 26._

David, the Psalmist, believed them.

NOW these be the last words of David. . . . The *Spirit of the Lord
spake by me*, and his word was in my tongue.

                                                    _II Samuel 23:1, 2._

Paul, the Apostle, believed them.

*ALL Scripture is given by inspiration of God*, and is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness;

                                                  _II Timothy 3:16, 17._

FOR this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because, when ye
*received the word of God* which ye heard of us, ye received it *not as
the word of men*, but as it is in the truth, *the word of God*.

                                                 _I Thessalonians 2:13._

Peter, the disciple, believed them.

KNOWING this first, that *no prophecy* of the Scripture is of any
*private interpretation*. For the *prophecy came not* in old time *by
the will of man*: but holy men of God *spake as they were* moved by the
Holy Ghost.

                                                     _II Peter 1:20-21._

John, the Beloved, believed them.

HE that hath received his testimony hath set to his seal that God is
true. For *he whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God*: for God
giveth not the Spirit by measure unto him.

                                                         _John 3:33-34._

Jesus Christ, believed them.

AND beginning at *Moses* and *all the prophets*, he expounded unto them
in *all the scriptures* the things concerning himself.

                                                           _Luke 24:27._



                            Scriptures, The.
                       *They supply every need.*


*1st. They produce FAITH.*

SO then *faith cometh* by hearing, *and hearing by the word of God*.

                                                         _Romans 10:17._

*2nd. They induce Spiritual GROWTH.*

AS new born babes, *desire the sincere milk of the word*, that ye may
*grow thereby*.

                                                          _I Peter 2:2._

*3rd. They BUILD us up.*

AND now, brethren, I commend you to God, *and to the word of his grace*,
which is *able to build you up*.

                                                           _Acts 20:32._

*4th. They DISCERN our hearts.*

THE word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged
sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of
the joints and marrow, and is *a discerner of the thoughts and intents
of the heart*.

                                                         _Hebrews 4:12._

*5th. They keep us FROM SINNING.*

THY *word* have I *hid in mine heart, that I might not sin* against
thee.

                                                        _Psalms 119:11._

*6th. They become one's WEAPON.*

AND take the helmet of salvation, and the *sword* of the Spirit, *which
is the word of God*.

                                                       _Ephesians 6:17._

*7th. They make our lives a SUCCESS.*

*THIS book of the law shall not depart out of my mouth*; but thou *shalt
meditate therein day and night*, that thou mayest observe to do
according to all that is written therein: for then thou shalt make thy
ways prosperous, and then shalt thou have *good success*.

                                                           _Joshua 1:8._

THESE were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they *received
the word* with all readiness of mind, *and searched the scripture
daily*, whether those things were so.

                                                           _Acts 17:11._



                            Scriptures, The.
                       *God's promises FOR YOU.*


WHEREBY are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises: that by
these ye might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust.

                                                         _II Peter 1:4._

*1st. His presence.*

TEACHING them to *observe all things* whatsoever I have commanded you:
and, *lo, I am with you always*, even unto the end of the world. Amen.

                                                        _Matthew 28:20._

*2nd. Guidance.*

I WILL instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shalt go: I
will *guide thee with mine eye*.

                                                          _Psalms 32:8._

*3rd. Divine Intercession.*

WHO is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is
risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also *maketh
intercession for us*.

                                                          _Romans 8:34._

*4th. Grace to live.*

AND God is *able to make all grace* abound toward you; that ye, always
having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to *every good work*.

                                                   _II Corinthians 9:8._

*5th. Victory over temptation.*

THERE hath no temptation taken you but such as *is common to man*: but
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are
able; but will *with the temptation also make a way to escape*, that ye
may be able to bear it.

                                                  _I Corinthians 10:13._

*6th. Forgiveness of sin.*

*I WILL forgive their iniquity*, and I will *remember their sin no
more*.

                                                       _Jeremiah 31:34._

*7th. Answer to prayer.*

THEREFORE I say unto you, What things soever ye desire, when *ye* pray,
*believe that ye receive them*, and ye shall have them.

                                                           _Mark 11:24._

*8th. The Holy Spirit.*

IF ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children:
how much more shall your *heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit* to them
that ask him?

                                                           _Luke 11:13._

*9th. Power for Service.*

BUT ye shall receive *power*, after that the *Holy Ghost is come* upon
you: ye shall be witnesses unto me both in *Jerusalem*, and in all
*Judaea* and in *Samaria*, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.

                                                             _Acts 1:8._

*10th. Divine wisdom.*

IF any of you lack *wisdom, let him ask of God*, that giveth to all men
liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

                                                            _James 1:5._

*11th. Divine strength.*

FEAR thou not, for *I am with thee*; be not dismayed, for I am *thy God,
I will strengthen* thee; *yea*, I will *help* thee; yea, I will uphold
thee with the right hand of my righteousness. . . . For I the Lord thy
God will *hold thy right hand*, saying unto thee, *Fear not, I will help
thee*.

                                                      _Isaiah 41:10, 13_

*12th. Divine Comfort.*

*I WILL not leave you comfortless*: I will come to you.

                                                           _John 14:18._

WHEN thou *passest through the waters*, I will be *with thee*; and
through the rivers, *they shall not overflow thee*: when thou walkest
through the fire, thou *shalt not be burned*.

                                                           _Isaiah 43:2_

*13th. Divine teaching.*

BUT the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost whom the Father will send in
my name, he shall *teach* you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.

                                                           _John 14:26._

*14th. Our Labor not Vain.*

THEREFORE, my beloved brethren, *be ye steadfast, unmovable*, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor
is not in vain in the Lord.

                                                  _I Corinthians 15:58._

*15th. Our work rewarded.*

BE ye strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak: *for your work
shall be rewarded*.

                                                   _II Chronicles 15:7._

*16th. A Heavenly mansion.*

LET not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me.
In my Father's house *are many mansions*; if it were not so, I would
have told you. I go to *prepare a place for you*.

                                                          _John 14:1-2._

*17th. A glorified body.*

FOR we know that, if our earthly house of this tabernacle (our physical
bodies) were dissolved (dead), we have a building of God, a house not
made with hands (*the resurrection body*), eternal in the heavens.

                                                   _II Corinthians 5:1._

*18th. A Coming Lord.*

SO Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many; and unto them that
look for him shall he *appear the second time* without sin unto
salvation.

                                                         _Hebrews 9:28._

*THIS same Jesus*, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall *so
come in like manner* as ye have seen him go into heaven.

                                                            _Acts 1:11._



                            Scriptures, The.
                            *For the Jews.*


God is not done with the Jews:

SAY, then, hath God cast away His people? *God forbid*.

                                          _Romans 11:1; Jeremiah 31:37._

*Their land shall be restored:*

AND they shall say, This land that was desolate *is become like the
garden of Eden*.

                                _Ezekiel 36:35, 38; Isaiah 62:1-9; etc._

*The people shall be restored:*

AND I will *bring again the captivity of my people of Israel*, and they
shall *build* the waste cities, and *inhabit* them; and they shall
*plant* vineyards, and drink the wine of them; they shall also *make
gardens* and eat the fruit of them. And I will plant them upon their
land, and they shall *no more be pulled up out of their land* which I
have given them, saith Jehovah.

                                                        _Amos 9:14, 15._

*They shall be more blest than ever.*

AND I will settle you after your old estates, and will *do better unto
you than at your beginnings*; and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

                                                        _Ezekiel 36:11._

*They shall be regenerated:*

A *NEW heart* also will I give you, and a *new spirit* will I put within
you: and I will *take away the stony heart* out of your flesh, and I
will *give you a heart of flesh*.

                                                        _Ezekiel 36:26._

*These promises are unconditional:*

THEREFORE say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God; I do
not this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but *for mine holy name's
sake*, which ye have profaned among the heathen, whither ye went.

                                                  _Ezekiel 36:22,31,32._

Jews should be urged to read the entire New Testament, especially Mathew
and Hebrews.

Read: Zechariah 12:10; Daniel 9:26.

                                  ----

                        _*Isaiah 53rd CHAPTER.*_

Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed?

For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of
a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him,
there is no beauty that we should desire him. (Love him for his
sacrifice.)

*He is despised and rejected of men*; a man of sorrows, and acquainted
with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; *he was despised,
and we esteemed him not. Surely he hath borne our griefs*, and carried
our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and
afflicted.

*But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities*: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; *and with his
stripes we are healed*.

All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own
way; *and the* Lord hath laid on him the *iniquity of us all*.

*He was oppressed, and he was afflicted* yet no opened not his mouth: he
is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her
shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth. (*Jesus Christ was surely
a man of, affliction.*)

He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his
generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: *for the
transgression of my people was he stricken*. (Christ bore our sins in
His body.)

And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death;
because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth.
(This is a beautiful picture of Christ.)

*Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him*; he hath put him to grief; when
thou shalt make *his soul an offering for sin*, he shall see his seed,
he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in
his hand. (Christ the sin offering for the world.)

He shall see the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; *for he shall bear
their iniquities*. (That's what Christ did.)



                            Scriptures, The.
                 *Given to INSTRUCT the Church-member.*


THESE things have I written unto you that *believe upon* the *name* of
the *Son* of *God*; THAT YE MAY KNOW that ye have *eternal life*.

                                                          _I John 5:13._

Thus the word of God assures us of salvation, and we may *know we are
saved* because God says so.

SEARCH the *scriptures*; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and
they are they which testify of me.

                                                            _John 5:39._

No matter where we open the Bible we may learn about the Saviour.

FOR *whatsover* is BORN OF GOD overcometh the world: and this is the
victory that *overcometh* the *world*, even our faith.

                                                           _I John 5:4._

He who has *God's life* in him, is the one who *has victory.*

IF ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that doeth
righteousness is BORN OF HIM.

                                                          _I John 2:29._

WHOSOEVER is *born* of God *doth not commit sin*; for his seed remaineth
in him: and he can not sin, because he is born of God.

                                                           _I John 3:9._

This means that the *new nature* "His seed" *cannot sin*, though the old
nature does.

WE know that we have passed from death unto life, *because we love the
brethren*. He that loveth not his brother, abideth in death. Whosoever
hateth his brother is a murderer; and ye know that no murderer hath
eternal life abiding in him.

                                                       _I John 3:14-15._

The fact that we find ourselves *loving God's people* and having
fellowship with them, is one of the most simple proofs that we are born
of God.

See pages 34 and 35 on *new birth*.



                            Scriptures, The.
                  *HOW TO READ them HELPFUL thoughts.*


*1st.* Read it regularly. Have a certain time each day when you can read
it without hurry.

*2nd.* Read it prayerfully. God's book cannot rightly be apprehended
without the aid of God's Spirit. "Open thou mine. eyes, that I may
behold wondrous things out of thy law."

*3rd.* Read it studiously. When you come to something, you do not fully
understand, stop and obtain light upon it from commentary, references,
Bible dictionary, etc.

*4th.* Read it consecutively. Aim to read the Bible through from Genesis
to Revelation in the course of a year, but do not hurry the reading in
order to get through it in that time.

*5th.* Read it sympathetically. Ask when, where, by whom, and for what
purpose each book that you read was written. In that way get the
standpoint of the sacred writer, and put yourself in sympathy with him.

*6th.* Read it, noting its perspectives, observe the dates of events, by
the aid of the Bible margin, and so keep them in your mind at their
proper relative distances from each other; thus, Abraham, though he
appears in Genesis 12, is halfway between Adam and Christ.

*7th.* Read it topically. By the aid of a concordance and a Bible Text
Book. See what it has to declare upon Faith, Love Justification, etc.

*8th.* Read it in a spirit of obedience. Seek in it for direction. Make
its precepts the rule of your life.

*9th.* Read it in faith. Take it as God's word to yourself. Look upon
its promises as your own

THIS book is the word of God showing the state of a man, the way of
salvation the doom of sinners, the happiness of believers.

Its doctrines are holy, its precepts are binding, its histories are
immutable. Read it to be wise, believe it to be safe practice it to be
holy, and live it to be happy.

It contains light to direct you food to support you, and comfort to
cheer you.

It is the traveler's map, the pilgrim's staff, the pilot's compass, the
soldier's sword and the christian's charter.



                            Scriptures, The.
                      *Importance of Bible study.*


Have a good print Bible, well bound of your own; keep it where you spend
most of your time and then search it.

*SEARCH the Scriptures*; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and
they are they which *testify of me*.

                                                            _John 5:39._

THESE were more noble than those in Thessalonica in that they received
the word with all readiness of mind, and *searched the scriptures daily,
whether those things were so*.

                                                            _Acts 17:11_

Set apart at least ten minutes (longer if possible) each day. Choose an
hour for study when your mind is clearest. The writer finds the first
thing in the morning, his best time. May the first four words in the
Bible be your motto, "In the beginning God."

THE Lord God has given me the *tongue* of the learned, *that I should
know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary*: he wakeneth
morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned.

                                                          _Isaiah 50:4._

AT that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of
heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and *hast revealed them unto babes*.

                                                        _Matthew 11:25._

AND now, brethren, I commend you to *God*, and to the *word* of His
*grace*, which is *able* to *build* you *up*, and to give you an
inheritance among all them which are sanctified.

                                                            _Acts 20:32_

STUDY to *shew thyself approved unto God*, a workman that needeth not to
be ashamed, *rightly dividing the word of truth*.

                                                       _II Timothy 2:15_



                            Scriptures, The.
                          *How to study them.*


*1st*. When you open your Bible never forget that *it is God's word*,
not man's word.

FOR this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because, when ye
receive the word of God which ye heard of us, ye receive it *not as the
word of men*, but as it is in truth, *the word of God*, which
effectually worketh also in you that *believe*.

                                                 _I Thessalonians 2:13._

FOR the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man; but *holy men
of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost*.

                                                        _II Peter 1:21._

*2nd.* Read your Bible as if it were written for *you only*.

FOR whatsoever things were written aforetime were written *for our
learning*, that *we through patience* and *comfort of the scriptures
might have hope*.

                                                          _Romans 15:4._

ALL *scripture* is given *by inspiration of God*, and is profitable for
*doctrine*, for *reproof*, for *correction*, for *instruction* in
righteousness.

                                                      _II Timothy 3:16._

*3rd*. Study with *prayer*, making the *psalmist's prayer* yours.

OPEN thou *mine eyes*, that I may behold *wondrous things* out of *thy
law*.

                                                        _Psalms 119:18._

*4th*. Study with *meditation* expecting help, comfort, blessing and
success in living for God.

THIS book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou *shalt
meditate therein day* and *night*, that thou mayest observe to do
according to all that is written therein: for then thou *shalt* make thy
way *prosperous*, and then thou *shalt* have *good success*.

                                                            _Joshua 1:8_

One of the most important things in eating is chewing. Don't let any one
chew your spiritual food for you.

THY words were found, and *I did eat them*; and *thy word was unto me
the joy and rejoicing of mine heart*.

                                                       _Jeremiah 15:16._

*5th.* Study your Bible depending upon the Holy Spirit to teach you. You
will fail to learn if you do not.

BUT the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in
my name, *He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance*, whatsoever, I have said unto you.

                                                           _John 14:26._

BUT when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the
Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he
shall testify of me.

                                                           _John 15:26._

NEVERTHELESS I tell you the truth; It is expedient for you that I go
away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if
I depart, I will send him unto you.

                                                             _John 11:7_

*6th.* And as you read *pray*: "Thou light of life shine into my heart,
and reveal thyself to me now from thy word."

Study to know God's will and do it, Christ-like, holy in living and
humble in service.

IF any man will do *His will*, he *shall know* of the *doctrine*, (R.V.
Teaching) whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself.

                                                             _John 7:17_

Cleanse your life by the application of the word.

WHEREWITHAL shall a young man *cleanse his way*? by taking heed thereto
according to *thy word*.

                                                         _Psalms 119:9._



                            Scriptures, The.
                           *How to memorize?*


In preparing this book I trust that I have done something toward
supplying a long-felt need among the Christians who desire to be soul
winners.

Looking at the great number of scripture references in this book it
would seem like asking something that was impossible to suggest the
memorizing of *all* these passages. Yet it is a comparatively easy task
if undertaken in the right manner.

In memorizing:

*1st.* Memorize the difficulty then locate the verses under that
difficulty and memorize the verses and where they are found. For example
say John 1:29 "Behold the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the
world" instead of merely saying "Behold the Lamb of God," etc., omitting
to say John 1:29.

*2nd.* Learn it. Don't get a faint, indefinite idea of it. *Take no
"snap shot" but give it a "time exposure."* If you want to remember any
text in after years as well as at the present time, let it make a deep,
clear, vivid impression on your mind.

*3rd.* There are a great many "methods" or "schemes" of memorizing
advanced in this day of ours, but the writer's opinion is that the best
way of memorizing is to *get to work and do it*. If it is easily
acquired by some easy method, you may depend on it that *it will be as
easily lost*.

*4th.* Read the verses over twenty times, close your Bible, see if you
can repeat it correctly, *then to be sure, read* it again. *I have made
a practice of writing out on paper* the passages to be memorized. *Once
writing the verse is worth a dozen repetitions of it by mouth*. In
Joliet after talking on personal work one night a lady came to me and
said "How did you memorize so many passages of scripture to meet the
difficulties?" I said to her, "Did you ever ride on the train?" "Oh yes,
hundreds of times." "Did you notice the brakeman come in and call out
the station? How did he know it was the right station? He went over that
road every day, and that is what you and I have to do.

*5th. Review, Review, Review.* That's the secret of memorizing. *Review*
every *day*. *Review* every *week*. *Review* every *year*. *Review,
Review, Review*.

How many people you hear saying: "I know the verse one day but forget it
the next." *Well you need to review, that's all*.

*6th.* Use the passages of Scripture. Seek occasions for talking to
persons who have difficulties. *Practice! Practice!! Practice!!!* That's
what the *lawyer*, *preacher*, and *doctor* have to do, and that is what
I had to do. Be "seasonable" or "unseasonable," in season or out of
season, only *seek* your *opportunity* to *practice*.

*7th.* Will you join the author in committing to memory the Gospel of
St. John in a year?  Learn three verses a day and review constantly
until a chapter is repeated at one time?

Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee.

                                                        _Psalms 119:11._



                            Scriptures, The.
                    *The word of God our TESTIMONY.*


*THE WORD OF GOD IS YOUR TESTIMONY.*

BE *ready* ALWAYS to *give* an *answer* to *every man* that *asketh* you
a *reason of the hope* that is in you with *meekness* and *fear*.

                                                         _I Peter 3:15._

WHOSOEVER therefore *shall confess me before men*, him will *I confess
also before my Father* which is in *heaven*.

                                                        _Matthew 10:32._

BUT *whosoever* shall *deny me before men* him will *I also deny before
my Father* which is in *heaven*.

                                                        _Matthew 10:33._

*IF thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus*, and shalt believe
in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be
saved. For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; *and with
the mouth confession is made* unto salvation.

                                                       _Romans 10:9-10._

DAVID prayed, "*O Lord, open thou my lips*, and my *mouth* shall show
forth thy praise."

                                                         _Psalms 51:15._

Live so that you can say with the Psalmist.

I HAVE not hid thy righteousness within my heart; I have declared thy
faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy lovingkindness
and thy truth from the great congregation.

                                                         _Psalms 40:10._

FOR I am *not* ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the *power* of
*God* unto *salvation* to *every one that believeth*.

                                                          _Romans 1:16._

THE law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his
lips: He walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from
iniquity.

                                                          _Malachi 2:6._

Read: I John 5:15; II Timothy 2:12.



                                Skeptic.
                *The HONEST enquirer, though skeptical.*


IF you are an honest doubter, let me ask you to pray, "O God, if there
be a God show me the truth and I will follow it." Read the book of John
and walk in the light as fast as he reveals it to you, and if you do not
understand everything at once, remember you do not understand many other
things you use and believe;

BUT these (the writings of John's gospel) are written that ye might
*believe* that *Jesus* is the *Christ*, the *Son* of *God*; and that
*believing* ye might have *life* through *His name*.

                                                           _John 20:31._

IF any man *will do his will*, he shall *know* of *the doctrine*.

                                                            _John 7:17._

God tells us that an unregenerated man cannot understand spiritual
things.

BUT the *natural man* receiveth not the things of *the Spirit of God*:
for they are *foolishness unto him*: neither can he know them, because
they *are spiritually discerned*.

                                                   _I Corinthians 2:14._

The blind man (Mark 8:24), saw "*men as trees." walking* when Christ
first gave him sight, but he used what sight he had and then Christ gave
him more.

If you use the light you have, the Spirit will give you more. Many have
had the same experiences through which Thomas the Apostle, passed; read
it.

*EXCEPT I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my
finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I
will not believe*. And after eight days again his disciples were within,
and Thomas with them: then came Jesus, the door being shut, and stood in
the midst, and said, Peace be unto you. Then saith he to Thomas, Reach
hither *thy finger*, and behold *my hands*; and reach hither thy hand,
and thrust it *into my side*: and be not faithless, *but believing*. And
Thomas answered and said unto him, *My Lord and my God*.

                                                        _John 20:25-28._



                     Spiritualism Fortune Telling.
                        *God WARNS against It.*


*REGARD not* them that have *familiar spirits*, neither seek after
wizards, to be defiled by them: I am the Lord thy God.

                                                       _Leviticus 19:31_

THE soul that turneth after such as have *familiar spirits, and after
wizards*, to go a whoring after them, I will even set my face against
that soul, and will cut him off from among his people.

                                                       _Leviticus 20:6._

*Beware of Spiritualism.*

BELOVED, *believe not every spirit*, but try the spirits whether they
are of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the world.
Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: Every spirit that confesseth that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: And every spirit that
confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God: and
this is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should
come: and even now already is in the world.

                                                         _I John 4:1-3._

EVEN him, whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power and
*signs and lying wonders*, And with all *deceivableness of
unrighteousness* in them that perish; because they received not the love
of the truth, that they might be saved. And for this cause God shall
send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie: That they all
might be damned who believe not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.

                                              _II Thessalonians 2:9-12._

THERE shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son or his
daughter to pass through the fire, or that *useth divination or an
observer of times or an enchanter, or a witch, or a charmer or a
consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer*.

                                                 _Deuteronomy 18:10-11._



                              Temperance.
                 *God's WARNING against INTEMPERANCE.*


*WOE unto them that rise up early in the morning*, that they may follow
strong drink, that continue until night, till *wine* inflame them.

                                                          _Isaiah 5:11._

*WOE unto them that are mighty to drink wine*, and men of strength to
mingle strong drink.

                                                          _Isaiah 5:22._

WOE unto him that *giveth his neighbor drink*, that putteth the bottle
to him, and maketh him drunken also.

                                                        _Habakkuk 2:15._

HEAR thou, my son, and be wise, and guide thine heart in the way. *Be
not among winebibbers*; among riotous eaters of flesh: For the drunkard
and the glutton shall *come to poverty*: and drowsiness shall clothe a
man with rags. . . . Who hath *woe*? who hath *sorrow*? who hath
*contentions*? who hath *babbling*? who hath *wounds* without cause? who
hath *redness of eyes*? They that *tarry long at the wine*; they that go
to seek mixed wine. *Look not thou upon the wine* when it is red, when
it giveth his colour in the cup, when it moveth itself aright. At the
last it *biteth like a serpent*, and *stingeth like an adder*.

                                             _Proverbs 23:19-21, 29-32._

WINE is a *mocker*, strong drink is *raging*: and whosoever is deceived
thereby *is not wise*.

                                                        _Proverbs 20:1._

HE that loveth pleasure shall be a poor man: he that *loveth wine* and
oil *shall not be rich*.

                                                       _Proverbs 21:17._

AND *be not drunk with wine*, wherein is excess; but be filled with the
Spirit.

                                                       _Ephesians 5:18._

BUT Daniel *purposed in his heart* that he *would not defile himself*
with the portion of the king's meat, *nor with the wine which he drank*.

                                                           _Daniel 1:8._



                              Temptation.
                       *How to gain the VICTORY.*


When you are tempted remember that Christ has promised to deliver you.

THERE hath no *temptation taken you but such as is common to man*: but
God is *faithful*, who will *not suffer (you)* to be *tempted above*
that *ye are able*; but will WITH THE TEMPTATION ALSO MAKE A WAY OF
ESCAPE, that ye may be *able to bear it*.

                                                  _I Corinthians 10:13._

THE Lord *knoweth* how to *deliver the Godly out of temptation*.

                                                         _II Peter 2:9._

*BLESSED* is the man that *endureth temptation*: for when he is tried, .
. . he shall receive the crown of life. . . . Let no man say when he is
tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with evil,
neither tempteth he any man: But every man is tempted, when he is *drawn
away of his own lust*, and enticed.

                                                        _James 1:12-14._

BE *strong* and of *good courage*; be not *afraid*, neither be thou
*dismayed*: for the *Lord* thy *God* is with thee *whithersoever thou
goest*.

                                                           _Joshua 1:9._

FEAR thou not, for *I am with thee*: be not dismayed; for I am thy God:
*I will strengthen thee*; yea *I will help thee*; yea, *I will uphold
thee* with the right hand of my righteousness.

                                                         _Isaiah 41:10._

FOR we have not a high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling
of our infirmities; but was *in all points tempted like as we are*, yet
without sin. Let us *therefore* come boldly unto the throne of grace,
that we may obtain mercy, and *find grace to help in time of need*.

                                                      _Hebrews 4:15-16._

*WATCH and pray*, that ye enter not into temptation.

                                                        _Matthew 26:41._

*RESIST the devil, and he will flee from you*.

                                                            _James 4:7._

Read: Revelation 3:10; Romans 8:35-39.



                           Unpardonable Sin.


REMEMBER, as long as there are desires in your heart to do good, you
have not sinned away your day of Grace; for these desires are the result
of the Holy Spirit doing his office work to bring you to God.

ALL that the Father giveth me shall come to me; *and him that cometh to
me I will in no wise cast out*.

                                                            _John 6:37._

THE Lord is not slack concerning His promise, as some men count
slackness; but is *longsuffering* to usward, *not willing that any
should perish, but that all* should come to repentance.

                                                         _II Peter 3:9._

WHEREFORE he is *able to save them to the uttermost* that come unto God
by Him, seeing He ever liveth to make intercession for them.

                                                         _Hebrews 7:25._

God is willing to save all who will come to Him, no matter what feelings
or conditions are.

FOR *whosoever* shall call upon the *name* of the *Lord shall be saved*.

                                                         _Romans 10:13._

Show just what the unpardonable sin is?

WHEREFORE I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven unto men: *but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost* shall not
be forgiven unto men. And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of
man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the Holy
Ghost, *it shall not be forgiven him*, neither in this world, neither in
the world to come.

                                                     _Matthew 12:31-32._

VERILY I say unto you, all sing shall be forgiven unto the sons of men,
and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme: But he that shall
blaspheme against the *Holy Ghost hath never forgiveness*, but is in
danger of *eternal damnation*.

                                                         _Mark 3:28-29._



                             Unforgiveness.
                   *For those who will not forgive.*


Do not delay one moment, you must forgive them or God will not forgive
you.

THEREFORE if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest thy
brother *hath aught against thee*; Leave there thy gift before the
altar, *and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother*, and then
come and offer thy gift.

                                                     _Matthew 5:23, 24._

Have you forgiven *all*?

AND when ye stand praying, *forgive, if ye have ought against any*: that
your Father also which is in heaven may *forgive you your trespasses*.

*BUT if ye do not forgive, neither will your Father* which is in heaven
*forgive your trespasses*.

                                                       _Mark 11:25, 26._

AND be ye *kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another*,
even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you.

                                                       _Ephesians 4:32._

FOR if ye *forgive men their trespasses*, your heavenly Father will also
forgive you:

*But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father
forgive your trespasses*.

                                                     _Matthew 6:14, 15._

PUT on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of
mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, and longsuffering;
Forbearing one another, *and forgiving one another*, if any man have a
quarrel against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.

                                                  _Colossians 3:12, 13._

If you refuse to forgive your neighbor, you make it impossible for God
to forgive you.

LET all *bitterness*, and *wrath*, and *anger*, and *clamour* and *evil
speaking, be put away* from you *with all malice*.

                                                       _Ephesians 4:31._



                          Worldly Amusements.
                       *"I see no HARM in them"*


*LOVE not the world*, neither the things that are in the world. *If any
man love the world*, the love of the Father is not in him.

                                                          _I John 2:15._

WHEREFORE, if meat make my brother to offend, I will *eat no flesh*
while the world standeth, *lest I make my brother to offend*.

                                                    _I Corinthians 8:13_

Paul was willing to give up meat for the sake of others. Can you not
give up something?

AND whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all *in the name of the Lord
Jesus*, giving thanks to God and the Father by him.

                                                      _Colossians 3:17._

WHETHER therefore ye eat, or drink or whatsoever ye do, *do all to the
glory of God*.

                                                   _I Corinthians 10:31_

*BE YE not unequally yoked together with unbelievers*.

                                                  _II Corinthians 6:14._

*NO man can serve two masters*: for either he will hate the one, and
love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other,
*Ye cannot serve God and mammon*.

                                                         _Matthew 6:24._

YE adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that *the friendship of the
world is enmity with God*.

                                                             _James 4:4_

WHEREFORE *come out* from among them, and *be ye separate*, saith the
Lord.

                                                   _II Corinthians 6:17_

NO man that warreth *entangleth himself with the affairs of this life*;
that he may *please him* who hath chosen him to be a soldier.

                                                        _II Timothy 2:4_

FOR ye are bought with a price: therefore *glorify God in your body*,
and in your spirit, which are God's.

                                                    _I Corinthians 6:20_

*WALK in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes*: but
know thou, that *for all these things* God will *bring thee into
judgment*.

                                                     _Ecclesiastes 11:9_

KNOW ye not that ye are *the temple of God*, and that the *Spirit of God
dwelleth in you*? If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God
destroy; for the *temple of God is holy, which temple ye are*.

                                               _I Corinthians 3:16, 17._

DO you think that you could retain the Holy Spirit while on a Ball Room
floor? Would that not be defiling the temple of the Holy Spirit? Your
body is that temple.

THEY profess that they know God; *but in works they deny him*, being
abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate.

                                                           _Titus 1:16._

When you are on a dance floor or sitting at the card table, are you
confessing Christ by your works? Could you invite Him to join you? Can
you ask a blessing on it.

BE careful for nothing; *but in every thing by prayer and supplication*
with thanksgiving let your request be made known unto God.

                                                      _Philippians 4:6._

WHETHER therefore ye eat, or drink, *or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God*.

                                                  _I Corinthians 10:31._

Do you dance and play cards for the glory of God?

*BE ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers*: for what
fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion
hath light with darkness? and what concord hath Christ with Belial? or
what part hath he that believeth with an infidel? *And what agreement
hath the temple of God with idols? for ye are the temple of the living
God*:

                                               _II Corinthians 6:14-16._

Some say: "All my friends dance, and my pastor does not object to our
dances."

I must say with Paul:

IF any man preach *any other gospel unto you* than that *ye* have
received, *let him be accursed*.

                                                        _Galatians 1:9._



                            Young Converts.
                         *What they should do.*


By doing these *four* things nobody can write backslider after your
name.

*1st. Every day say something To GOD.*

*PRAY* without ceasing.

                                                 _I Thessalonians 5:17._

BE careful for nothing; but in *everything by prayer and supplication
with thanksgiving* let your *requests be made known unto God*.

                                                      _Philippians 4:6._

IF *ye abide in me*, and *my words abide* in *you*, ye *shall ask* what
ye will, and it *shall* be done unto you.

                                                            _John 15:7._

THEREFORE I say unto you, *What things soever ye desire*, when ye pray,
believe that ye receive them, and *ye shall have them*.

                                                           _Mark 11:24._

CALL *unto me, and I will answer thee*, and show ye great and mighty
things, which thou knowest not.

                                                        _Jeremiah 33:3._

CONFESS your faults one to another, and pray for one another, that *ye*
may be healed. The *effectual, fervent prayer of a righteous man
availeth much*.

                                                           _James 5:16._

NOW, when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his
house; and his windows being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem, *he
kneeled down upon his knees three times a day, and prayed, and gave
thanks* before his God, as he did aforetime.

                                                          _Daniel 6:10._

EVENING, and *morning*, and at *noon*, will I *pray*, and cry *aloud*:
and He *shall hear my voice*.

                                                         _Psalms 55:17._

IF my people which are called by my name, *shall humble themselves*, and
pray, and *seek my face*, and turn from their wicked ways; then will I
hear from heaven, and *will forgive their sin*, and will heal their
land.

                                                   _II Chronicles 7:14._

Neglect praying, and you will backslide.

*2nd. Everyday let God say something TO YOU.*

SEARCH *the scriptures*; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and
they are they which testify of me.

                                                            _John 5:39._

THY *words were* found, and *I did eat them*; and thy word was unto me
*the joy and rejoicing of my heart*.

                                                       _Jeremiah 15:16._

STUDY *to show thyself approved unto God, a workman* that needeth not to
be ashamed, RIGHTLY DIVIDING THE WORD OF TRUTH.

                                                      _II Timothy 2:15._

AS newborn babes, *desire the sincere milk of the word*, that ye may
grow thereby.

                                                          _I Peter 2:2._

THY *word have I hid in mine heart*, that I might not sin against thee.

                                                        _Psalms 119:11._

AND take the helmet of salvation, and the SWORD OF THE SPIRIT, which is
the *word of God*.

                                                       _Ephesians 6:17._

THY word is a *lamp* unto my *feet*, and a *light* unto my *path*.

                                                        _Psalm 119:105._

THESE were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received
the word with all readiness of mind, and *searched the scriptures daily,
whether those things were so*.

                                                           _Acts 17:11._

Set apart at least ten minutes a day for your Bible and let God speak to
you.

THIS book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou shalt
*meditate therein day and night*, that thou mayest observe to do
according to all that is written therein: for then thou shalt make thy
way prosperous, and then thou *shalt have good success*.

                                                           _Joshua 1:8._

*3rd. Every day say something FOR GOD.*

WHOSOEVER therefore shall *confess me before men*, him will *I confess
also before my Father* which is in heaven. But whosoever shall *deny me*
before men him will *I also deny before my Father* which is in heaven.

                                                     _Matthew 10:32-33._

THAT if thou shalt *confess with thy mouth* (not your influence) the
Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him
from the dead, thou *shalt be saved*. For with the *heart man believeth*
unto righteousness; and with the *mouth confession* is made unto
salvation.

                                                       _Romans 10:9-10._

LET your *light so shine before men* that they may *see your good
works*, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

                                                         _Matthew 5:16._

YE are my *witnesses*, saith the Lord, and my servant whom I have
chosen.

                                                         _Isaiah 43:10._

WHOSOEVER therefore shall be *ashamed of me and my words*, in this
adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the *Son of man* be
ashamed.

                                                            _Mark 8:38._

WHOSOEVER shall *confess that Jesus is the Son of God*, God dwelleth in
him, and he in God.

                                                          _I John 4:15._

SING unto the Lord, bless his name; *shew forth* his salvation *from day
to day*.

                                                          _Psalms 96:2._

RETURN *to thine house, and shew* how great things God hath done unto
thee.

                                                            _Luke 8:39._

AND he said to them all, If any man will come after me, let him deny
himself, and *take up his cross daily*, and follow me.

                                                            _Luke 9:23._

*4th. Every day do something FOR GOD.*

THEREFORE my beloved brethren, *be steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work* of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor
is not in vain in the Lord.

                                                  _I Corinthians 15:58._

GO ye into *all the world* and preach the gospel to *every creature.*

                                                           _Mark 16:15._

AS we *have therefore opportunity, let us do good* unto all men.

                                                       _Galatians 6:10._

I MUST work the works of him that sent me, *while it is day*: the *night
cometh*, when no man can work.

                                                             _John 9:4._

LET him know that he which converteth *the sinner* from the error of his
way *shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins*.

                                                           _James 5:20._

AND they that be wise shall *shine as the brightness of the firmament*;
and *they that turn many to righteousness* as the stars for ever and
ever.

                                                          _Daniel 12:3._

AND whosoever shall *give to drink* unto one of these little ones *a cup
of cold water* only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you,
*he shall in no wise lose his reward*.

                                                        _Matthew 10:42._

IN as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
brethren, *ye have done it unto me*.

                                          _Last clause.  Matthew 25:40._

AND *let us not be weary* in well doing: for in due season we shall
reap, if we faint not.

                                                        _Galatians 6:9._

SAY not ye, There are yet four months, and then cometh harvest? behold,
I say unto you, *Lift up your eyes*, and look on the fields; for they
are *white already to harvest*.

                                                            _John 4:35._

HEREIN is my Father glorified that *ye bear much fruit*.

                                                            _John 15:8._




                             GENERAL INDEX


Age-- (see "I am too young")

Amusements--(see "Worldly Amusements")

Answers to prayer

Assurance-- How you may know you are saved

Backslider-- God's warning to

Backslider-- How he may return

Baptism-- It follows Salvation

Baptism-- Practiced by Christ and others

Bible-- (see "Scriptures")

Business-- I will be hindered in making money

Careless--(see "I am not concerned")

Ceremonies--(Do not save) see "Baptism"

Christ--His Deity

Christian living-- Those trying to be Christians

Christian living-- Strength to hold out

Christian living-- How to grow in grace

Christian living-- Results of keeping close to Christ

Christian living-- Results following repentance and faith

Christian Science

Church-- Must I join to be a Christian?

Companionship-- (see "My companions keep me from Christ")

Confession-- Confessing Christ publicly

Consecration

Conversion-- (instantaneous)

Converts-- (see Young Converts)

Daily Living

Daily Prayer

Decision--(see "Not now")

Deity of Christ

Delay--(see "Not now")

Doubter--The honest

Doubter--The honest (also)

Everlasting Life

Excuses-- I am a member of the church

Excuses-- I am good enough

Excuses-- I am not very bad

Excuses-- I am not good enough

Excuses-- I am too great a sinner

Excuses-- Not now

Excuses-- There are Church members no better than I

Excuses-- My companions keep me from Christ

Excuses-- I cannot give up my evil ways

Excuses-- There is too much to give up

Excuses-- I can not surrender all

Excuses-- The Christian life is too hard

Excuses-- I have tried and failed

Excuses-- I can't hold out

Excuses-- I have no feeling

Excuses-- I am not concerned

Excuses-- The Indifferent

Excuses-- Those who know not the way

Excuses-- I don't know what or how to believe

Excuses-- I can't understand

Excuses-- I can't see

Excuses-- My heart is too hard

Excuses-- I am too young

Excuses-- I believe everyone will be saved

Excuses-- It is too late

Excuses-- Don't talk to me

Faith--Necessary to salvation

Feeling--(see "I have no feeling")

Forgiveness--(see "Unforgiveness")

Formalist

Fortune-Telling--(see "Spiritualism")

Friendship

Giving (systematically)

God--(see "Doubter")

Growth

Habits

Hell-- A real place

Hell-- "God is unjust to damn"

Hell-- Condition of the lost

Holiness

Holy Spirit

Hypocrites

Inconsistency--(see "Hypocrites")

Indifferent--The

Intemperance

Jews--Scriptures for them

Joining the church

Love--For your neighbor

Moralist-- Trusts in self-righteousness

Moralist-- Who trusts in good works

Neglecting-- (see I am not concerned)

Persecution--(see "Ridicule")

Personal Work-- Its great importance

Personal Work-- Qualifications needed

Personal Work-- The soul-winner's prayer

Personal Work-- Help in cottage meetings

Personal Work-- Use of the "Prayer list" card

Personal Work-- Three helpful hints

Personal Work-- Hints and suggestions

Personal Work-- Suggestive scriptures

Personal Work-- Fruit promised

Personal Work-- Fruit-bearer's chapter

Personal Work-- For those Who are weak

Personal Work-- A word to the careless

Power-- God's Keeping

Power-- God's Keeping (also)

Prayer-- Heard and answered

Prayer-- Victory through' prayer

Prayer-- Regular seasons for prayer

Prayer-- Conditions in answer to prayer

Prayer-meetings--(Preparation for)

Promises

Regeneration-- The new birth

Regeneration-- (Results of)

Rejection

Repentance

Revival-- How to make it a success

Revival-- What to bring to it

Rules for daily living

Rules for daily prayer

Rules for daily prayer (also)

Sabbath and Sunday

Scriptures, The-- Given by inspiration

Scriptures, The-- They supply every need

Scriptures, The-- God's promises for you

Scriptures, The-- For the Jews

Scriptures, The-- For Church members

Scriptures, The-- How to read them

Scriptures, The-- Importance of Bible study

Scriptures, The-- How to study them

Scriptures, The-- How to memorize

Scriptures, The-- Our Testimony

Self-denial

Service

Soul-Winning

Spiritualism

Strength to hold out

Strength to hold out (also)

Suggestions--(see "Converts")

Trying to be a Christian

Temperance

Temptation

Testimony

Testimony (also)

Unbelief, Lost through

Unforgiveness--For those who will not forgive

Unpardonable Sin

Work--(see "Personal Work")

Workers--Hints

Worldly Amusements

Young Coverts




                          INDEX FOR CHRISTIANS


Amusements--(see "Worldly Amusements")

Answers to prayer

Assurance--How you may know you are saved

Christian Living-- Those who are trying to be Christians

Christian Living-- Strength to hold out

Christian Living-- How to grow in grace

Christian Living-- Results of keeping close to Christ

Christian Living-- Results following repentance and faith

Christian Science

Confession-- Confessing Christ publically.

Consecration

Converts

Daily Living

Daily Living (also)

Daily Prayer

Forgiveness--(see "Unforgiveness")

Fortune-Telling--(see "Spiritualism")

Giving--(systematically)

God--(see "Doubter")

Growth

Holiness

Holy Spirit

Hypocrites

Inconsistency--(see Hypocrites")

Indifferent

Intemperance

Jews-- Scriptures for them

Joining the Church

Love--For your neighbor

Persecution--(see "Ridicule")

Personal Work-- Its great importance

Personal Work-- Qualifications needed

Personal Work-- The soul-winner's prayer

Personal Work-- Help in cottage meetings

Personal Work-- Use of the "Prayer-list" card

Personal Work-- Three helpful hints

Personal Work-- Hints and suggestions

Personal Work-- Suggestive scriptures

Personal Work-- Fruit promised

Personal Work-- Fruit-bearer's chapter

Personal Work-- For those who are weak

Personal Work-- A word to the careless

Pleasures--For those hindered by them

Power--God's Keeping

Power--God's Keeping (also)

Prayer-- Heard and answered

Prayer--  Victory through.' prayer

Prayer--  Regular seasons for prayer

Conditions in answer to prayer

Prayer-meetings--preparation for

Promises

Regeneration-- The new birth

Regeneration--  Results of

Rejection

Repentance

Revival-- How to make it a success

Revival--  What to bring to it

Ridicule and Persecution

Rules for daily living

Rules for daily prayer

Rules for daily prayer (also)

Sabbath and Sunday

Salvation-- To whom offered

Salvation--  Offered to the most sinful

Salvation-- Saved alone by faith

Salvation-- What must I do to be saved

Salvation-- Proof we are saved

Scriptures, The-- Given by inspiration

Scriptures, The-- They supply every need

Scriptures, The-- God's promises for you.

Scriptures, The-- For the Jews

Scriptures, The-- For Church members

Scriptures, The-- How to read them

Scriptures, The-- Importance of Bible study

Scriptures, The-- How to study them

Scriptures, The-- How to memorize

Scriptures, The-- Our Testimony

Self-denial

Self-righteousness

Service

Sin-- ("I am not very bad")

Sin--  ("I am too bad")

Sin--  ("I am too bad") (also)

Sin--  Unpardonable

Skeptic

Soul-winning

Spritualism

Strength to hold out

Strength to hold out (also)

Strength to hold out (as well)

Suggestions--(see "Converts")

Surrender

Trying to be a Christian

Temperance

Temptation

Testimony

Testimony (also)

Unbelief, Lost through

Unforgiveness--For those Who will not forgive

Unpardonable Sin

Work--(see "Personal Work")

Workers--Hints

Worldly Amusements

Young Converts




                         INDEX FOR THE UNSAVED


Age-- (see "I am too young")

Backslider-- God's warning to

Backslider--  How he may return to God

Baptism-- Follows Salvation

Baptism-- Practiced by Christ and others

Bible-- (see Scriptures)

Business--I will be hindered in making money

Careless--(see, I am not concerned)

Ceremonies--(Do not save)--see Baptism

Christ--His Deity

Church--Must I join to be a Christian?

Companionship--(see "My companions keep me from Christ")

Conversion (instantaneous)

Decision--(see "Not now")

Deity of Christ

Delay--(see "Not now")

Doubter

Doubter (also)

Everlasting Life

Excuses-- I am a member of the church

Excuses-- I am good enough

Excuses-- I am not very bad

Excuses-- I am not good enough

Excuses-- I am too great a sinner

Excuses-- Not now

Excuses-- There are Church members no better than I

Excuses-- My companions keep me from Christ

Excuses-- I cannot give up my evil ways

Excuses-- There is too much to give up

Excuses-- I cannot surrender all

Excuses-- The Christian life is too hard

Excuses-- I have tried and failed

Excuses-- I can't hold out

Excuses-- I have no feeling

Excuses-- I am not concerned

Excuses-- The Indifferent

Excuses-- Those Who know not the way

Excuses-- I don't know what or how to believe

Excuses-- I can't understand

Excuses-- I can't see

Excuses-- My heart is too hard

Excuses-- I am too young

Excuses-- I believe everyone will be saved

Excuses-- It is too late

Excuses-- Don't talk to me

Faith-- Necessary to salvation

Feeling-- (see "I have no feeling")

Forgiveness

Formalist

Friendship

God-- (see "Doubter")

Habits

Hell-- A real place

Hell-- "God is unjust to damn"

Hell-- Condition of the lost

Hypocrites

Inconsistency--(see Hypocrites)

Indifferent, The

Moralist--Who trusts in self-righteousness

Moralist--Who trusts in good works

Neglecting--(see "I am not concerned")

Persecution--(see "Ridicule")

Pleasures--For those hindered by them

Rejection

Repentance

Ridicule and Persecution

Salvation-- To Whom offered

Salvation-- Offered to the most sinful

Salvation-- Saved alone by faith

Salvation-- What must I do to be saved

Salvation-- Proof We are saved

Self-righteousness

Sin-- ("I am not very bad")

Sin-- ("I am too bad")

Sin-- ("I am too bad") (also)

Sin-- Unpardonable

Skeptic

Strength to hold out

Strength to hold out (also)

Surrender

Trying to be a Christian

Unbelief, Lost through

Unforgiveness-- For those who will not forgive

Unpardonable Sin

Worldly Amusements




                                 Songs:




                           The Bible Railway.




                             Consecration.




                 A Man May Be Down But He Never is Out.




                           Transcriber's Note


  - Bible verse abbreviations have been changed to full book names for
    consistancy.
  - Corrected bible verse reference errors which did not match quoted
    verse.
  - Minor typographical errors have been silently corrected.




*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RESCUE THE PERISHING ***




                     A Word from Project Gutenberg


We will update this book if we find any errors.

This book can be found under: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53811

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so
the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright royalties.
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this
license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic works to protect the Project Gutenberg(tm) concept and
trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be
used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific
permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook,
complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly
any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances
and research.  They may be modified and printed and given away - you may
do practically _anything_ in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.



                   The Full Project Gutenberg License


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg(tm) mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg(tm) License available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license.


 Section 1. General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg(tm)
                            electronic works


*1.A.* By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works in your possession. If
you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

*1.B.* "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things
that you can do with most Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works even
without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph
1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic
works. See paragraph 1.E below.

*1.C.* The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of
Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works. Nearly all the individual works
in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and
you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent
you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg(tm) mission of promoting free access to electronic
works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg(tm) works in compliance with
the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg(tm) name
associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this
agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full
Project Gutenberg(tm) License when you share it without charge with
others.


*1.D.* The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg(tm) work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

*1.E.* Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

*1.E.1.* The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg(tm) License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg(tm) work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United
    States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org .
    If you are not located in the United States, you'll have to
    check the laws of the country where you are located before using
    this ebook.

*1.E.2.* If an individual Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain
a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright
holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United
States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or
providing access to a work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"
associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with
the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission
for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark as set
forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.3.* If an individual Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic work is
posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and
distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and
any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg(tm) License for all works posted
with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of
this work.

*1.E.4.* Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project
Gutenberg(tm) License terms from this work, or any files containing a
part of this work or any other work associated with Project
Gutenberg(tm).

*1.E.5.* Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg(tm) License.

*1.E.6.* You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg(tm) work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg(tm) web site
(http://www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or
expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a
means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include
the full Project Gutenberg(tm) License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

*1.E.7.* Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg(tm) works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.8.* You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works
provided that

  - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
    the use of Project Gutenberg(tm) works calculated using the method
    you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
    to the owner of the Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark, but he has
    agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
    within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
    legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
    payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
    Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation."

  - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
    you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
    does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg(tm)
    License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
    copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
    all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg(tm)
    works.

  - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
    any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
    electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
    receipt of the work.

  - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
    distribution of Project Gutenberg(tm) works.


*1.E.9.* If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg(tm)
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3. below.

*1.F.*

*1.F.1.* Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg(tm) collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your
equipment.

*1.F.2.* LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg(tm) trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees.
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY,
BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN
PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND
ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES
EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

*1.F.3.* LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

*1.F.4.* Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

*1.F.5.* Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

*1.F.6.* INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg(tm)
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg(tm) work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


   Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg(tm)


Project Gutenberg(tm) is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg(tm)'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg(tm) collection will remain
freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg(tm) and future generations. To
learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and
how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org .


  Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                               Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is
64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf . Contributions to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the
full extent permitted by U.S.  federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its volunteers
and employees are scattered throughout numerous locations. Its business
office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116,
(801) 596-1887, email business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
                           Archive Foundation


Project Gutenberg(tm) depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where
we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways
including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,
please visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


 Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic
                                 works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg(tm)
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg(tm) eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg(tm) eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

    http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg(tm),
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
