The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Organisation of the Royal Naval
Artillery Volunteers Explained, by Thomas Brassey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: The Organisation of the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers Explained

Author: Thomas Brassey

Release Date: May 28, 2018 [EBook #57226]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROYAL NAVAL ARTILLERY VOLUNTEERS ***




Produced by Brian Coe, David King, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive.)









   The Organisation of the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers Explained




                            The Organisation

                                 Of The

                              Royal Naval

                          Artillery Volunteers

                               Explained

                                   By

                          Thomas Brassey, M.P.


                                 London

                        Longmans, Green, And Co.

                                  1874

[Sidenote: Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers.]

It has been thought desirable to publish the following statement, for
the purpose of giving some explanation of the services, duties,
privileges, and general organisation of the Royal Naval Artillery
Volunteers.

[Sidenote: How to be recruited.]

In inviting persons to enrol themselves in the corps, the Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty desire to extend the volunteer movement,
so successfully established as an auxiliary to the land forces, to the
defence of this country by sea. The proposal is novel and unprecedented
in its character. In any other country than our own, it would, in all
probability, be visionary. In England, however, we possess a guarantee
for the success of such an undertaking, which cannot be found elsewhere.
A taste for maritime pursuits pervades this insular nation, and the hope
may therefore be confidently entertained that the appeal, now made to
the patriotism of the nautical and aquatic sections of the community,
will not be urged in vain.

[Sidenote: Naval opinions in favour of such a force.]

Eminent naval authorities have, for many years past, recommended the
formation of a corps, for the purposes of coast defence, composed of
persons who, while not possessing the wider experience of the seaman,
are accustomed to the management of boats, and in the constant habit of
going afloat. The Act for the Royal Navy Artillery Volunteers, passed in
the last session at the instance of the Admiralty, and the regulations
recently issued under that Act, afford the most convincing proof that,
in the estimation of those who are actually responsible for the
efficiency of the naval service, such a force is desirable. The
concurrence of the naval members of the late administration in the
various steps which have been taken, may likewise be quoted, in order to
show that there is a general desire, among those to whom the welfare of
the navy is an especial object of solicitude, for the success of the
movement, which it is the object of the present writer to explain.

[Sidenote: The harbour defence only.]

It has been already stated that coast defence, and not service at sea,
constitutes the especial sphere proposed for the Royal Naval Artillery
Volunteers. The term coast defence is perhaps, in a certain sense, a
misnomer. The defence of the most important of our commercial harbours
against an attack from the sea could not be effectually conducted by a
force composed exclusively of men trained for the land service alone.
The approach to all the great ports of the United Kingdom from the sea
involves the navigation of extensive estuaries, where floating
batteries, and armed rafts, and the use of torpedoes, are essential to a
complete defence, and would in point of fact effectually prevent the
nearer approach of a hostile fleet. In the laying out of torpedoes on an
extensive scale, a flotilla of boats would be required; and in
furnishing crews for such boats, the well-trained oarsmen, who, it is
hoped, will be found willing to enroll themselves in the Royal Naval
Artillery Volunteers, would be enabled to render valuable service. In
all probability, by their co-operation in the hour of danger, they would
release an equal number of highly trained seamen, who would form the
crews of sea-going cruisers. All our greatest ports, London, Hull,
Newcastle, Leith and Granton, ports for Edinburgh, Glasgow, Bristol,
Southampton, Belfast, Dublin, Cork, are situated at the head of an
extensive estuary, or at some distance from the mouth of a navigable
river. The mere enumeration of these names is sufficient to show how
large a sphere there might be, in the event of a threatened invasion,
for the employment, in the important and essential task of harbour
defence, of an auxiliary force composed, not of trained seamen, but of
persons who may be described generally as aquatics.

It is to be observed that a mere oarsman, although not trained at the
great guns, or in the use of rifle and cutlass, would be enabled to do
good work in a service in which the use of boats must be largely
resorted to; and that, in order to take a number at a gun mounted on a
raft, such as the 'Nancy Dawson,' which the late Captain Cole improvised
for our naval operations in the Sea of Azof, or to serve in a gun's crew
in a floating battery for harbour defence, neither sea legs nor sea
experience are indispensable qualifications. For such duties those
qualities are required which equally combine to make a good gunner and a
good soldier, whether afloat or on shore--a fair share of physical
strength and activity, intelligence, and, above all, courage and
patriotism.

[Sidenote: The force need not be numerous.]

Designed, as the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers have been, for the
especial work of coast and harbour defence, it is not necessary that the
corps should be very numerous. It certainly need not exceed the numbers
of our amateur yachtsmen and oarsmen, for whom the opportunity, now
offered, of taking their share in the national defence, is chiefly
intended. Enough will have been done, if a brigade can be formed at each
of the principal ports, of a strength varying from 200 to 600 men.

[Sidenote: The training required.]

Having described the general scope of the duties, which would devolve on
the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers, in the event of their being called
out for actual service, the nature of the training proposed for the
members of the force may be briefly explained. The first consideration
must be to familiarise them, to some extent, with the management of
boats. This instruction might occupy much time in a corps composed of
men, who had never been in the habit of going on the water; but, as the
Royal Naval Artillery Volunteer corps is to be recruited in a large
proportion from among aquatics, many of their number may be expected to
possess this qualification without the necessity for special
instruction.

The next point to claim attention will be the exercise at the great
guns. Here I may venture to affirm, from personal experience, that the
naval gun drills have been, in every detail, so carefully considered,
the instructors are so completely masters of the subject which they have
to teach, and the mechanical appliances are such effectual substitutes
for heavy manual labour, that a few days of constant attention will
suffice to make a volunteer a useful man in a gun's crew. The class of
recruits required for the Royal Navy Artillery Volunteers possess
advantages of intelligence and education, far beyond those which the
practical seamen can enjoy; and we may anticipate, from the experience
already acquired, that they will form some of the smartest gun's crews
in any branch of the naval service. There is neither insurmountable
difficulty, nor unduly fatiguing labour, in the drill at the great guns.
The intricacies could be mastered in a few days, if the volunteers were
kept continuously at drill, as they necessarily would be, should they
ever be called out for actual service.

The essential point in a volunteer corps is to secure men physically
capable of doing their work, and who may be confidently relied upon as
ready to serve, whenever they may be called upon.

The small-arm exercises are still more easily mastered. A rowing man
will find himself able to use his cutlass efficiently in a few hours;
and, after a couple of days of continuous drill, he would be able to go
through the manual and platoon exercises with satisfactory smartness and
precision.

Rowing and yachting gentlemen will perceive that they will have no
difficulty in acquiring the knowledge of their drills, which is required
in order to make them efficient, in the winter months. They will not
find that their favourite amusements on the water, in the summer months,
are incompatible with service in the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers.

[Sidenote: Facilities for drill.]

Every effort will be made to afford to those, who may be willing to join
the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers, the necessary facilities for
learning their drills. For the London brigade, the 'Rainbow,' a gun
vessel well adapted for the purpose, is now being fitted out at Chatham.
This vessel will be ready in two months from the date of this
publication; and, when completed, will be moored in the Thames in a
convenient position, off Somerset House. Should such an arrangement be
found convenient for members of the Corinthian and other yacht clubs at
Erith, it is possible that the 'Rainbow' may be moved, from time to
time, to moorings near the pier at Erith; and, should a desire to that
effect be expressed by the members of the rowing clubs higher up the
Thames, an effort will be made to move the vessel to moorings near the
boat-houses of any rowing clubs, which have their head-quarters below
Kew Bridge.

No positive promise, however, can be given that the 'Rainbow' shall be
moved. There are many points to consider, such as draft of water, height
and width of arches, and obstruction of the navigation of the river.

For those clubs which are established still higher up the river, where
there is not sufficient water to float the 'Rainbow,' facilities for
instruction may be provided by mounting a 64-pounder gun on a raft,
which could be towed from place to place, and moored to the bank of the
river adjacent to the boat-houses belonging to the clubs. An instructor
would accompany the raft; and, during the winter months, arrangements
might be made for giving to volunteers an opportunity of going through
their small-arm drills in a drill-shed, or other convenient place,
available for the purpose. Thus it may be found possible to extend the
system of instruction, by effectual, yet inexpensive, means, far up the
Thames, and so to embrace towns such as Reading, Maidenhead, Henley,
Windsor, and even the headquarters of rowing, the University of Oxford.

Inquiry having been made as to whether members will be expected to
appear in uniform, whenever they attend drill, it may not be superfluous
to mention that the regulations are silent on this point. Members will
only be required to wear uniform on special occasions, of which due
notice will be given.

[Sidenote: Regulations as to drill.]

Members of the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteer corps may therefore rest
assured that they will have the opportunity of being thoroughly
instructed in the drills, in which it is considered desirable that they
should be proficient.

The drills will comprise those for great guns, rifle, pistol, and
cutlass, as in the Royal Navy, and no deviation from these drills is to
be permitted.

[Sidenote: The Officer-Instructor.]

All drills will be carried out by the instructor, attached to the
brigades, under the officer-instructor. The permanent staff of a brigade
will consist of an officer-instructor and one petty officer instructor
for each battery. The officer-instructor will be commissioned as a
lieutenant in the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers, and will be selected
from officers of or retired from the Royal Navy, of and above the rank
of lieutenant. He will keep the muster-rolls, and it will be his duty to
make himself acquainted with all the members of his brigade, and their
qualifications. He will superintend all drills and exercises, and is to
have complete control over the petty officer instructors, and to be
responsible to the Admiralty for their conduct and efficiency.

[Sidenote: Attendances at drill.]

On the important point of the number of attendances at drill, the
regulations require that every volunteer must attend at least two drills
a month, until he has obtained the standard of an efficient. An
efficient must be able to perform in a satisfactory manner the duties of
any number except No. 1 at heavy gun exercise, or at revolving gun
exercise, as applicable to the 64-pounder guns mounted in gunboats; and
he must be possessed of a good knowledge of the manual, platoon, and
cutlass exercises.

[Sidenote: Service afloat not compulsory.]

It has already been explained that these qualifications may easily be
acquired in a fortnight of continuous attendance at drill, by the
application of a very ordinary amount of intelligence and attention. The
regulations expressly avoid the imposition of any compulsory service
afloat in time of peace. Target practice afloat is obviously essential
to the efficiency of a naval gunner; and it is therefore desirable that
every volunteer should have a fair number of opportunities of taking
part in this useful exercise. In a long summer's day, the members of the
London Brigade may embark in a gunboat at Erith or Gravesend, proceed to
the Maplin Sands, off Shoeburyness--which is the most convenient place
for firing practice over a sea range--and return to London by a
convenient hour in the afternoon or evening. It will doubtless be the
desire of every naval volunteer to avail himself of a sufficient number
of opportunities for target practice, to secure his own efficiency. But,
as there are many who will be anxious to have a greater amount of
exercise afloat, every volunteer, who wishes it, may embark once a year,
and remain for a period of eight days in a gunboat, manned by a crew to
be furnished from the battery to which he himself belongs. It should,
however, be observed that, when called out for actual service, the
volunteers will not be liable to embark in sea-going vessels. Whenever
so assembled, they will serve on board any of H.M, ships employed in the
defence of the coasts of the United Kingdom; unless, indeed, they
volunteer for, and are found capable of doing duty in, sea-going
cruisers. They will not be required to go aloft, or to attend to the
fires in the stoke-hole. They will, however, have to accommodate
themselves to the berthing and messing arrangements usual for the seamen
of the Royal Navy.

[Sidenote: Regulations issued by the Admiralty.]

The regulations recently issued contain ample information as to the
organisation of the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers; and their
practical effect will be summarised in the following extracts from the
code of rules.

The Volunteers are raised under the Act passed in 1873. They will be
called out by Royal proclamation, and will be liable to serve in any
vessels employed for coast defence. They will be liable to perform all
the ordinary duties of the vessels in which they may be embarked, in the
same manner as those duties are performed by the regular crews of Her
Majesty's ships, except those duties that can only be performed by
practical seamen.

The Royal Naval Artillery Volunteer force, for administrative purposes,
will be formed into brigades, and each brigade will consist of four or
more batteries of from 60 to 80 men. Each brigade will be designated by
a local name.

The following table contains the authorised establishment for brigades
and the batteries composing them:--

                                 Battery   Brigade   Brigade   Brigade
                                           of four    of six  of eight
                                         batteries batteries batteries

  Lieutenant-commander                           1         1         1

  Sub-lieutenant                       1         4         6         8

  Chief petty officer                  1         4         6         8

  First-class petty officer            2         8        12        16

  Second-class petty officer           2         8        12        16

  Buglers                              2         8        12        16

  Leading gunners and gunners      71/51   275/195   421/301   563/403
  (equivalent to leading seamen
  and able seamen)

  Lieutenant-instructor                          1         1         1

  First-class petty officer            1         4         6         8
  instructor

  Surgeon                                        1         1         1

  Bugle-major                                    1         1         1

  Armourer                                       1         1         1

  Total enrolled                   80/60   320/240   480/360   640/480

In this table, two numbers divided by a line signify the maximum and
minimum strength--thus 80/60 means not more than 80 and not less than
60.

Persons wishing to organise a corps to form part of a brigade of Royal
Naval Artillery Volunteers should place themselves in communication with
the Secretary of the Admiralty.

Whenever it is practicable, a brigade will be formed at each of the
large ports in the kingdom, and the batteries composing the brigade will
be raised in the immediate neighbourhood of the port.

When the Volunteers are not of sufficient strength at any port to form a
brigade, the batteries enrolled on a part of the coast formed into a
district will be formed into a brigade, and will be called a district
brigade.

The object of this organisation is to unite separate batteries under one
head, to secure uniformity among them, and to afford them the advantage
of an officer-instructor.

Candidates for enrolment as members of the Royal Naval Artillery
Volunteers must be of good character, and physically fit for the
service; their eligibility will be judged by the commanding officer of
the corps, assisted by such others of the corps as he may think fit to
appoint for that purpose.

No person below the age of 17 is to be enrolled in the corps without the
special authority of the Admiralty.

Boys of 14 years of age and upwards may be enrolled for the purpose of
being trained as buglers.

Men belonging to any other force liable to be called out for service in
case of war are not to be enrolled.

Apprentices are not to be enrolled without the consent of their masters.

Persons dismissed from any other service or corps for misconduct are not
to be enrolled without the special sanction of the Admiralty.

The commanding officer of a corps is to give to any Volunteer, on his
quitting the corps, a certificate of discharge, when requested to do so
by such Volunteer.

Every member has power to withdraw from the corps upon giving 14 days'
notice to that effect.

Enrolled members are classed as efficients and non-efficients.

All enrolled members who do not fulfil the conditions above referred to
are reckoned as non-efficients.

Each brigade will be commanded by a lieutenant commanding.

Each battery will be commanded by a sub-lieutenant.

In each battery there will be, as it has already been stated, one chief
petty officer, two 1st class, and two 2nd class petty officers.

The petty officers of a battery will be selected by the commanding
officer of the battery.

When assembled for drill or inspection, the Volunteers will be under the
command of the senior naval officer of the district. When the Volunteers
are assembled for drill, the senior officer will be represented by the
officer instructor, a retired commander or gunnery lieutenant of the
Royal Navy, whose duty it will be to see that all drills are properly
carried out.

When afloat, the Volunteers are to be, in all matters whatsoever, under
the command of the captain or commanding officer of the ship in which
they may be.

The authority of the officers commanding batteries is strictly limited
to their own batteries only. The discipline will be the same throughout
the corps, and will be enforced by the lieutenant commanding the
brigade, in conformity with the regulations issued by the Admiralty.

The lieutenant commanding will make arrangements for drill, securing, so
far as it may be necessary, separate hours for each battery. Before
adopting any final arrangements for drill, he will confer with the
officer instructor.

There may be an occasional general muster of the corps, when considered
necessary by the lieutenant commanding.

The batteries will take precedence at general parades according to their
numbers, and not according to the seniority of their respective
commanding officers.

The brigade staff will not be attached to a battery, but will act under
the lieutenant commanding only.

Officers of the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers rank with, but after,
officers of the Royal Navy and Royal Naval Reserve of their respective
ranks.

All officers of the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers will be
commissioned by the Admiralty.

The commanding officers of brigades will recommend, for the
consideration of the Admiralty, names of persons for the appointments
and promotion of officers in their brigades.

The appointment of an honorary commander to a brigade is allowed, and
such honorary lieutenants and sub-lieutenants as the Admiralty may think
fit to sanction.

Officers in full pay in the Navy or Army are not eligible for other than
honorary commissions.

The uniform approved for the officers resembles generally that worn by
officers of the Naval Reserve, silver being substituted for gold lace.

[Sidenote: The officers of the corps.]

The principle upon which the Volunteers should be officered has been one
of the most frequent subjects of discussion among those who have
associated themselves with the movement from the commencement, and who
have been provisionally enrolled, with the sanction of the Admiralty, in
anticipation of the passing of the Act of Parliament of last year.

A desire has been expressed that no officers should be appointed to the
corps, but that the Volunteers should serve only under direct naval
command. Practically, the desire, so strongly felt, has been fulfilled
in the arrangements which have actually been made.

Whenever called upon to serve afloat, or when embarked for the purpose
of training, the Volunteers will be under the command of the officer,
commanding the ship, in which they may be. When embarked for their first
cruise in the autumn of the present year, the arrangements were, of
necessity, experimental and provisional. There was a natural desire on
the part of the officer commanding the 'Foam' to meet the wishes of the
Volunteers themselves in every possible way, consistent with the
efficient performance of the service, and the carrying on of the drills
and exercises required. The same considerate spirit will doubtless
prevail on all future occasions; but the Volunteers, who make themselves
acquainted with the regulations, will clearly perceive that, whenever
they embark, they place themselves under direct naval authority; and
that, when afloat, their own officers are never to assume any naval
command or authority whatever, unless ordered to do so by their superior
naval officers.

The officers of the Volunteers will do their utmost to assist the naval
officers to preserve discipline. They may, if they think fit, set an
example to their men by taking an active part in all the duties and
manual exercises. They may fall in at quarters, and take any number at
the gun. In short, they may become, as much as they please, active
working seamen and efficient practical gunners. It is for them to use
their own discretion in determining how much or how little they shall
participate in the manual labour, involved in carrying out the drills
and exercises ordered by the naval officers in command.

When at drill, as it has already been pointed out, the
officer-instructor will superintend the instruction of the Volunteers,
and he will be responsible that all exercises are properly carried out,
in accordance with the regulations from time to time laid down for the
instruction of the Royal Navy. It will thus be evident that the
paramount and undivided authority of the naval officers over the
Volunteers when afloat, and the superior responsibility of the officer
of instruction when the Volunteers are at drill, so largely overshadow
the authority of the officers of the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers in
all matters, excepting those which relate to discipline and the civil
administration and organisation of the corps, that it could not
reasonably be expected that retired naval officers of rank should
volunteer to become battery officers in the Royal Naval Artillery
Volunteer Corps. Naval officers of less exalted rank do not often
retire, if they have a great zeal for the service. Some exceptions,
however, there must be to this general rule; and it is probable that a
certain number of retired officers from the junior ranks of the Navy
will, hereafter, kindly offer their services to command brigades or
batteries in the ports or districts, in which they may happen to reside.
The Volunteers will at all times feel a pride in availing themselves of
such opportunities of acting under officers, who have received a high
professional training in Her Majesty's naval service.

While the effect of the arrangements, which have been described,
necessarily limits the sphere of the officers of the Royal Naval
Artillery Volunteers, their services, in several important points, are
not the less essential. It is to them that the Admiralty must look for
the exercise of their personal influence, in inducing recruits to join
their respective brigades and batteries; and their moral influence will
be the principal security for the maintenance of good discipline in a
force composed exclusively of Volunteers. Although, under the
regulations, no fixed standard of efficiency is expressly required in an
officer of the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteer force, those among them,
who can command sufficient leisure for the purpose, will readily
appreciate how excellent an effect must be produced by the personal
example of an officer, who will take pains to make himself acquainted
with the drills and exercises, in which the men under his command are
instructed. He will have the opportunity of obtaining the same
certificate of proficiency, which is given to those officers of the
Naval Reserve, who become qualified to drill the seamen of the reserve
at the great guns, and in the small arm exercises.

With the view of enlisting, in support of the Naval Volunteer movement,
the potent influences which are derived from the esprit de corps,
wherever it may reasonably and prudently be encouraged, it is proposed
to associate certain batteries in the London brigade with some of the
principal rowing and Corinthian yacht clubs on the Thames, and to give
commissions to any gentlemen, otherwise eligible, who are instrumental
in raising a full battery of Naval Volunteers.

[Sidenote: The rowing and Corinthian yacht clubs.]

The following list of some of the principal rowing clubs, will serve to
show the large number of gentlemen, from whom assistance may be
expected, in promoting the success of a movement for extending the
Volunteer service to a certain sphere of naval operations;

                   Name of rowing club     Number of
                                             members

                   London                        480

                   Kingston                      425

                   Thames                        300

                   Ino                           300

                   Waldegrave                    200

                   Twickenham                    175

                   West London                   170

                   Oscillators                   162

                   North                         150

                   Grove Park                    150

                   Isleworth                     100

                   Ilex                          100

                   Molesey                        --

The Corinthian yacht clubs on the Thames are equally able to render
assistance, and are indeed capable of raising, if they think fit, an
entire brigade for the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteer Corps.

The resources of the clubs located on the banks of the Thames have been
particularly specified; because the present writer, in his connection
with the movement under consideration, is more immediately identified
with that river. Readers of these pages, residing in the vicinity of any
of our great ports, will doubtless be able to discover equally ample
materials for the foundation of a sufficient force, for the purposes of
co-operation in the defence of the coast, in their own neighbourhood. A
corps, though it may be raised at some distance from the sphere of its
intended operations, in the event of threatened invasion, will not be
the less valuable for the defence of a great port.

The railway and the telegraph afford the means of concentrating large
bodies of men in a few hours at any port on the shores of the United
Kingdom. Wherever the coast-guard are stationed, the means exist of
giving instruction to the Naval Volunteers. All the out-ports, at which
men have been enrolled, can be visited by a gunboat at frequent
intervals, to embark the Volunteers for target practice afloat; while
those who wish to go to sea for an eight days' cruise, will have, every
year, the opportunity of doing so.

[Sidenote: The Volunteer movement.]

In conclusion, it may not be superfluous to offer a few observations on
the Volunteer movement generally. The most cogent inducements to
Volunteer activity may appear to be wanting at the present time. Our
country is happily not threatened with the danger of foreign invasion. A
becoming modesty will deter any individual connected with the Volunteer
service from arrogating to himself any share in the prestige and
distinction, which are the special privilege of the regular services. It
is an essential feature of the present movement that there shall be no
contribution from the state in the form of pecuniary reward for services
rendered; and that every effort shall be made by the Volunteers to
impose as small a burden as possible on the Exchequer. The sterner sense
of duty, which is now encouraged among the Volunteers for land service,
is opposed to all attempts to gain popularity for the auxiliary forces
by festivals, holidays, and entertainments.

While, however, all these inducements and attractions are withheld, a
higher standard of efficiency in the officers and the men is properly
insisted on. In presence of the difficulties which arise from the
altered conditions of the service, some earnest friends of the Volunteer
movement have been oppressed with doubts, as to the possibility of
stimulating the patriotism of the country to such a pitch, that
Volunteers shall still be forthcoming in a time of profound peace. I do
not conceal my individual opinion that compulsory service may fairly be
required, from every individual of military age, when the country is in
danger. Unfortunately, so strong a measure would probably meet with an
amount of resistance, which could not be overcome in this free country,
where nothing affecting the social habits and prejudices of the people
can be proposed, which is not universally popular. But I venture to hope
that we may rely, in the absence of direct legal compulsion, on motives
even more powerful than the strong arm of the law. If every man who is
capable of co-operating in the defence of his country should feel
himself compelled, by his sense of duty and patriotism, to enter his
name in the roll of her defenders, the liability to service, thus
imposed by the free will of the Volunteer upon himself, will be a far
more effectual safeguard than legal compulsion, for the security and the
honour of England.

The Volunteer movement affords the occasion for teaching, in the most
practical form, the duty of self-sacrifice in a worthy cause.

In the artificial conditions of modern society, there are multitudes of
men, who, in the ordinary exercise of their vocation, are unduly
deprived of the opportunities for physical exercise and development.
More especially is this true of the younger members of the professional
and commercial classes. To them an appeal is now most earnestly made on
behalf of the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers. In taking a part in our
drills and exercises, they will do a work beneficial to themselves
individually, and conducive to the welfare of their country.

N.B.--Any gentlemen wishing to join the Royal Naval Artillery
Volunteers, may communicate with Mr. Thomas Brassey, M.P., or Commander
St. Vincent Nepean, R.N., at the temporary head-quarters, 4, Great
George Street, Westminster. The regular drills of the corps will not be
commenced until the drill vessel 'Rainbow' has been moored off Somerset
House, and all other arrangements have been completed. Gentlemen are
earnestly invited to send in their names, in the meanwhile,
provisionally, so that the organisation of the brigade may be completed
at an early date; and that the movement at the out-ports may be
encouraged by the example of the metropolis.




        REGULATIONS FOR THE "ROYAL NAVAL ARTILLERY VOLUNTEERS."


                    CONSTITUTION AND ESTABLISHMENT.

[Sidenote: Authority.]

1. The "Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers" are raised under the "Royal
Naval Artillery Volunteer Act of 1873."

They are subject to the provisions of that Act, and to all regulations
made with regard to them by the authority of the Admiralty.

[Sidenote: Liability to Actual Service.]

2. By Royal Proclamation, the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers may be
assembled for actual service; and whenever so assembled, they will be
liable to serve on board any of Her Majesty's ships or vessels employed
in the defence of the coasts of the United Kingdom, or in any of the
tenders or boats attached to such vessels.

They will also be liable to perform all the ordinary duties of the
vessel in which they may be embarked, in the same manner as those duties
are performed by the regular crews of Her Majesty's ships, except those
duties that can only be performed by practical seamen.

They will not be required to go aloft, or to attend the fires in the
stoke-hole.

They will accommodate themselves to the berthing and messing
arrangements usual for the Seamen of the Royal Navy.

[Sidenote: Corps, definition of.]

3. A Corps is a body of persons who combine, under common rules, to form
a part of the Naval Artillery Volunteer Force.

The members of a Corps are either enrolled or honorary.

[Sidenote: Enrolled Members.]

Enrolled members are persons of every grade, whose names are duly
entered for service in the muster-rolls of a Corps.

[Sidenote: Honorary Members.]

Honorary members are persons who contribute to the funds of a Corps, but
are not enrolled for service.

[Sidenote: Formation.]

4. The Naval Artillery Volunteer Force, for administrative purposes,
will be formed into Brigades, and each Brigade will consist of four or
more Batteries of from 60 to 80 men.

[Sidenote: How to be named.]

5. Each Brigade will be designated by a local name, in addition to its
number in the Force.

Each Battery will be designated by its number in the Brigade.

Every Corps will bear a local name only.

[Sidenote: Commanding Officers.]

6. Each Brigade will be commanded by a Lieutenant Commanding.

Each Battery will be commanded by a Sub-Lieutenant.

Every Corps will have a Commanding Officer, who will of necessity be the
Senior Officer belonging to the Corps, no matter what his rank may be,
and who will be responsible, under the "Naval Artillery Volunteer Act,
1873," for the management of the internal affairs of the Corps.

[Sidenote: Establishment.]

The following table contains the authorised establishment for Brigades
and the Batteries composing them:--

                                 Battery   Brigade   Brigade   Brigade
                                           of four    of six  of eight
                                         batteries batteries batteries

  Lieutenant-commander                           1         1         1

  Sub-lieutenant                       1         4         6         8

  Chief petty officer                  1         4         6         8

  First-class petty officer            2         8        12        16

  Second-class petty officer           2         8        12        16

  Buglers                              2         8        12        16

  Leading gunners and gunners      71/51   275/195   421/301   563/403
  (equivalent to leading seamen
  and able seamen)

  Lieutenant-instructor                          1         1         1

  First-class petty officer            1         4         6         8
  instructor

  Surgeon                                        1         1         1

  Bugle-major                                    1         1         1

  Armourer                                       1         1         1

  Total enrolled                   80/60   320/240   480/360   640/480

In this table, two numbers divided by a line signify the maximum and
minimum strength--thus 80/60 means not more than 80 and not less than
60.


                          FORMATION OF CORPS.

[Sidenote: Course to be pursued for the formation of a new Corps.]

8. Persons wishing to form a Corps to form part of a Brigade of Royal
Naval Artillery Volunteers should place themselves in communication with
the Secretary of the Admiralty.

[Sidenote: Reason for formation.]

9. The Admiralty, in considering offers of the services of a new Corps,
will have regard to the number of Corps or Batteries already existing on
the same part of the Coast where the proposed Corps would be.

[Sidenote: New Corps not to be formed under certain circumstances.]

10. The formation of a new Corps will not be sanctioned, unless a
sufficient number of persons to form a Battery are prepared to enrol
themselves, and whilst any Battery already existing in the locality is
below its establishment.

[Sidenote: Information to be given on application.]

11. In offering the services of a new Corps for acceptance, it should be
stated:--

    (_a_) The place proposed for its head-quarters.

    (_b_) The number of persons who are prepared to enrol themselves.

    (_c_) The name and address of some person with whom communications
    on the subject may be made.

    (_d_) The Brigade of which it will form a part.

    (_e_) That a proper place will be secured for the safe custody of
    any Government arms and ammunition which may be issued.

(Form in Appendix A.)

[Sidenote: Single Brigade.]

12. Whenever it is practicable, a Brigade will be formed at each of the
large ports in the Kingdom, and the batteries composing the Brigade will
be raised in the immediate neighbourhood of the port.

[Sidenote: District Brigade.]

When the Volunteers are not of sufficient strength at any port to form a
Brigade, the batteries enrolled on a part of the coast formed into a
district, will be formed into a Brigade, and will be called a District
Brigade.

The object of this organization is to unite separate batteries under one
head, to secure uniformity among them, and to afford them the advantage
of an Officer Instructor.


                        PRECEDENCE AND COMMAND.

[Sidenote: Rank of the Force.]

13. The "Royal Naval Artillery Volunteer Force" takes precedence
immediately after the "Royal Naval Volunteers" established by the Act of
1859.

[Sidenote: Precedence of Brigades.]

14. The relative precedence of the Brigades forming the Force is
determined by the date on which they were first severally established.

[Sidenote: Precedence of Corps.]

15. The relative precedence of Corps is determined by the date on which
the Secretary of the Admiralty has first received a letter offering the
services of the Corps.

[Sidenote: Precedence of Officers with others.]

16. Officers of the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers rank with, but
after, Officers of the Royal Navy and Royal Naval Reserve of their
respective ranks.

[Sidenote: Precedence of Officers with each other.]

17. The relative precedence of Officers of the whole Force is determined
solely by the rank and date of their commissions in the Force.

[Sidenote: Precedence of Officers of same date.]

18. The relative precedence of Officers bearing commissions of the same
date is determined by the order in which their names appear in the Navy
List.

Nothing in these Regulations is to give a claim to any Officer of the
Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers to assume command of any of Her
Majesty's Land Forces on shore, nor to any Officer of Her Majesty's Land
Forces to assume command of any of Her Majesty's Naval Forces.

But when Officers of the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers are employed
on shore on joint service with Her Majesty's Land Forces, their relative
rank shall carry with it all precedence and advantages attaching to the
rank with which it corresponds, except command as aforesaid.

[Sidenote: To be under command of Senior Naval Officer whenever
           assembled.]

19. All Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers, when assembled for drill or
inspection, or voluntarily doing any naval duty either afloat or on
shore, will be under the command of the Commander-in-Chief, or Senior
Naval Officer of the district within which such Royal Naval Artillery
Volunteers are undergoing drill or inspection, or doing duty.

[Sidenote: Not to assume Naval Command unless specially ordered.]

20. The Officers and Petty Officers of the Royal Naval Artillery
Volunteers shall command each other, and the Gunners and Buglers of the
Force, agreeably to their respective ranks, in all matters relating to
their duties; but none of them are ever to assume any naval command or
authority whatsoever, unless ordered to do so by their Superior Naval
Officers, and they are to be, in all matters whatsoever, under the
command of the Captain or Commanding Officer of the ship in which they
may be, and of the Officer of the Watch for the time being whatsoever
his rank may be.


                        HONOURS AND DECORATIONS.

[Sidenote: Guards.]

21. A Guard of Honour may be provided as a matter of course for a member
of the Royal Family, or the Admiralty, on arrival in the neighbourhood
of the headquarters of a Brigade; but in no other case will any body of
the Naval Artillery Volunteers take part in any public procession or
ceremony, or form a Guard of Honour, without the special authority of
the Admiralty or the Senior Naval Officer of the district.

[Sidenote: Decorations.]

22. The only decorations that may be worn on the left breast are those
given by the Queen or by a Foreign Sovereign.

In the last case mentioned, Her Majesty's permission to accept and wear
the decoration must have been granted.

The medal of the Royal Humane Society may be worn.


                               OFFICERS.

[Sidenote: Appointment.]

23. All Officers of the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers will be
commissioned by the Admiralty.

[Sidenote: Commanding Officers to recommend.]

24. The Commanding Officers of Brigades will recommend for the
consideration of the Admiralty, names of persons for the appointments
and promotion of Officers in their Brigades.

In order to enable the Admiralty to judge the qualifications of the
persons recommended, the Commanding Officer will forward, with his
recommendation, a statement giving the name, age, residence, place of
education, and occupation or profession of the Candidate, as well as a
Medical Officer's Certificate, stating that the Candidate is in good
health and fit to perform the duties of an Officer.

[Sidenote: Holding a commission in other Forces.]

25. If any person recommended for an appointment as an Officer holds a
commission in the Royal Navy or other Force, the nature of such
commission should be stated in the letter of recommendation.

[Sidenote: Eligibility of Full Pay Officers.]

26. Officers on full pay in the Navy or Army are not eligible for other
than honorary commissions.

[Sidenote: Honorary Commander.]

27. The appointment of an Honorary Commander to a Brigade is allowed,
and such Honorary Lieutenants and Honorary Sub-Lieutenants as the
Admiralty may think fit to sanction.

[Sidenote: Honorary Chaplain and Surgeon.]

28. The appointments of an Honorary Chaplain and Staff-Surgeon to a
Brigade are allowed at the discretion of the Admiralty.

[Sidenote: Honorary appointments when to cease.]

29. The appointments of all Honorary Officers will cease whenever the
Force is called out for actual service, unless the Admiralty shall see
fit to accept the services of any such Officers who may volunteer for
active service.

[Sidenote: Precedence of Honorary Officers.]

30. No Officer holding an honorary commission can, in virtue of it, take
precedence of any Officer holding a substantive commission of the same
rank.

[Sidenote: Officers to possess a knowledge of duties, &c.]

31. Every Officer is required to possess a competent knowledge of his
duties, and to give a proper attendance at the drills of his Corps.

Any Officer who does not attend the number of drills prescribed for the
enrolled Volunteers of his Corps, to qualify them for certificates of
efficiency, will not be allowed to retain his commission unless the
Admiralty may see special reasons for a relaxation of this Regulation.


                            PETTY OFFICERS.

[Sidenote: Appointment.]

32. The Petty Officers of a Battery are appointed by the Commanding
Officer of the Battery, from among the enrolled members of the Battery.

[Sidenote: Leading Gunners.]

33. Leading Gunners may be appointed by the Commanding Officer of a
Battery, in the proportion of one to every twenty of Enrolled Gunners.

[Sidenote: Reduction.]

34. A Petty Officer or Leading Gunner may be reduced by the Commanding
Officer of a Brigade, for any sufficient cause; such cause to be judged
by the officers of the Brigade sitting as a Court of Inquiry.


                           ENROLLED MEMBERS.

[Sidenote: Qualification.]

35. Candidates for enrollment as Members of the Royal Naval Artillery
Volunteers must be of good character and physically fit for the Service;
their eligibility will be judged by the Commanding Officer of the Corps,
assisted by such others of the Corps as he may think fit to appoint for
that purpose.

[Sidenote: Age.]

36. No person below the age of 17 is to be enrolled in the Corps without
the special authority of the Admiralty.

Boys of 14 years of age and upwards may be enrolled for the purpose of
being trained as Buglers.

[Sidenote: Disqualification.]

37. Men belonging to any other force liable to be called out for service
in case of war are not to be enrolled.

Apprentices are not to be enrolled without the consent of their masters.

Persons dismissed from any other Service or Corps for misconduct are not
to be enrolled without the special sanction of the Admiralty.

[Sidenote: Certificate of Discharge.]

38. The Commanding Officer of a Corps is to give to any Volunteer, on
his quitting the Corps, a Certificate of Discharge, in Form B of the
Appendix, when requested to do so by such Volunteer.

[Sidenote: Classification.]

39. Enrolled Members are classed as Efficients and non-Efficients.

[Sidenote: Efficients.]

40. An Efficient Member must have fulfilled the conditions prescribed by
the Admiralty from time to time.

[Sidenote: Non-Efficients.]

41. All Enrolled Members who do not fulfil the conditions above referred
to are reckoned as non-Efficients.


                           HONORARY MEMBERS.

[Sidenote: Number and position.]

42. The number of Honorary Members attached to any Corps is not
regulated by the Admiralty, and such Members are not included in the
muster-roll of the Corps to which they are attached.

They are not subject to discipline nor allowed to interfere with the
duties of the Corps, but they are permitted to wear its uniform, unless
a special provision to the contrary is contained in the authorised Rules
of the Corps.


                                 RULES.

[Sidenote: Must be approved.]

43. In order to give legal force to the Rules of a Corps for the
management of its affairs, they must be submitted to the Admiralty for
approval.

[Sidenote: To be transmitted in duplicate.]

44. All Rules which are to be forwarded for approval must be transmitted
in duplicate, one copy to be retained at the Admiralty, the other to be
returned to the Corps, with any alterations that may be required.


                           COURTS OF INQUIRY.

[Sidenote: Nature of.]

45. A Court of Inquiry is not a judicial body; it has no power to
administer an oath.

It is to be considered as a Board of which the Admiralty or an Officer
in command of a Brigade or Corps may make use, to assist him in arriving
at a correct judgment on any subject upon which it may be expedient to
institute an inquiry.

[Sidenote: Duties of.]

46. The duties of a Court of Inquiry depend on the instructions which
the convening authority may think proper to give.

It may be either employed merely in collecting and arranging evidence,
or it may, in addition, be directed to give an opinion as to the facts
established by that evidence; but it has no power to pronounce any
judgment as to the course to be taken by the convening authority in
dealing with those facts.

When facts connected with the conduct of an individual are submitted to
the investigation of a Court of Inquiry, it is necessary that the
instructions for the guidance of the Court should be sufficiently
specific, as regards matter, names, dates, and places, to convey clearly
to the Court the nature of the subject into which it is appointed to
inquire, and also to enable the person whose conduct is called in
question to know what he has to answer.

It rests with the authority who orders the assembly of the Court of
Inquiry to decide whether it shall be open or closed.

All evidence taken by a Court of Inquiry is to be recorded as nearly as
possible in the words of the witness and in the order in which it is
received.

The proceedings when closed are to be signed by the President and
Members, after which they are to be forwarded by the President to the
convening authority.

[Sidenote: May be re-assembled.]

47. A Court of Inquiry may be re-assembled as often as the superior
authority may deem necessary, and on every occasion of its meeting it is
competent to receive and record new evidence.

[Sidenote: Power of Commanding Officer to assemble.]

The Commanding Officer of a Brigade is authorised to assemble a Court of
Inquiry, to investigate any matter with which he himself has the power
of dealing.


                              DISCIPLINE.

48. The course to be adopted as to the Discipline of the Volunteers will
be found in Part III of the Naval Artillery Volunteers Act.

[Sidenote: Meetings not to be held on Actions of Superiors.]

49. Meetings are not to be held in the Corps for the purpose of
expressing an opinion upon the acts of a Commanding Officer, or of
recommending him to take a particular course of action; nor are
memorials to be drawn up to the same effect; and no meetings except
those called together by or under the authority of the Commanding
Officer of a Brigade or Corps, who will be responsible for doing so,
will be recognised.

If any Volunteer has cause to think himself aggrieved, he will represent
his case to the Commanding Officer of his Battery. Any appeal against
the decision of the Commanding Officer of the Battery will be made
through him to the Commander of the Brigade, and any further appeal will
be made through both these officers to the Admiralty.

[Sidenote: Not to attend political meetings in uniform.]

50. Members of the Force are not, individually or collectively, to
attend political meetings, or join in public political discussion or
demonstrations in uniform.

[Sidenote: Bands of music.]

51. Bands of Volunteer Brigades are not to appear in uniform, for any
purpose, without the consent of the Commanding Officer of the Brigade.

[Sidenote: Permanent Staff not to receive presents.]

52. Members of the Permanent Staff will be held responsible that they do
not allow themselves to be complimented, either directly or indirectly,
by presents or collective expressions of opinion from persons who are
serving or who have served in the Brigade to which they are attached.

[Sidenote: Volunteers to salute Superiors of all Services.]

53. Officers and men of the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers, when in
uniform, are to pay the customary marks of respect to such Officers of
the Navy, Army, and Auxiliary Forces as are entitled to be saluted by
Officers and men of corresponding rank in their own Service.

[Sidenote: Officers to observe and enforce all Regulations.]

54. Every Officer and Petty Officer shall make himself acquainted with
and shall duly observe and obey, and as far as in him lies, enforce the
due execution of the "Royal Naval Artillery Volunteer Act, 1873," and
the Regulations for the "Royal Naval Artillery Volunteer Force,"
together with all Regulations, Instructions, and Orders, which may from
time to time be given or issued by the Admiralty, or by any Superior
Officer, and shall in all respects conform his conduct to the customs
and usages of Her Majesty's Naval Service.

[Sidenote: Discipline in Camp.]

55. When Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers are assembled with the Regular
Forces of the Army in Camp or for training, they will be under the
"Naval Discipline Act, 1866," in the same manner as if they were on
actual service, and will be placed under the immediate command of an
Officer of Her Majesty's Navy.

Camp rules will apply in all respects to the Royal Naval Artillery
Volunteers.

The Naval Volunteers must perform the Camp duties of fatigue, cooking,
&c.

[Sidenote: Case of misconduct when training to be reported.]

56. In case of grave misconduct of any of the Royal Naval Artillery
Volunteers whilst on board any of H.M. ships for the purpose of
training, the Officer in command of the ship will report the
circumstance to the Admiralty through the usual channel.


                        ASSEMBLIES OF THE FORCE.

[Sidenote: Conditions on which to meet under Arms.]

57. The Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers are not to assemble under arms
for any purpose unconnected with Parade, Drill, or Rifle practice,
except with the approval of the Admiralty.

[Sidenote: Brigaded with other Forces.]

58. The Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers may, when circumstances permit,
be brigaded with other Forces, the sanction of the Admiralty having been
previously obtained.

[Sidenote: Visiting Garrison or Camp.]

59. When any of the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers desire to visit any
Garrison or Camp as a naval body, the permission of the Secretary at War
must first be obtained through the Admiralty.

Upon all occasions of the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers entering a
Garrison or Camp as a body, the Officer in command must duly report his
arrival to the Senior Naval Officer present, or, if there is not one, he
will wait on the Officer in command of the Garrison or Camp.

[Sidenote: Command at Rifle Shooting Matches.]

60. When the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers are brought together under
arms at Rifle Shooting Matches, on other occasions, with other Volunteer
Corps, or with any of Her Majesty's Land Forces on shore, the Officer in
Command of the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers, present, shall take
care that everyone under his command complies with all the Regulations
of the Land Forces relative to the Camp or ground on which they may be,
and he shall confer with the Senior Officer of the Land Forces, and act
in concert with him, so that the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteer may in
all cases act in accordance with the orders under which the Land Forces
are acting; but it is to be distinctly understood that nothing in this
Regulation is to give a claim to any Officer of Her Majesty's Navy, or
of any Naval Volunteer Corps, to assume command of any of Her Majesty's
Land Forces, nor to any Officer of Her Majesty's Land Forces to assume
command of any of Her Majesty's Naval Forces.

[Sidenote: Surplus ammunition to be collected.]

61. When the Volunteers, at the termination of an exercise, are to
return by railway or boat to their head-quarters, the arms are to be
examined, and all the ammunition which has not been expended must be
collected and placed in a metal or leather case, with a view to its
being conveyed in safety to the head-quarters.


                                STORES.

[Sidenote: Responsibility for and care of.]

62. The Commanding Officer of a Corps is responsible to the Admiralty
for all stores which are supplied by Government for the use of the
Corps.

[Sidenote: Arms to be supplied by Government.]

63. Each Corps will be supplied gratuitously with arms from the
Government stores to the full number of its enrolled members, if
required.

[Sidenote: Description of arms.]

64. The arms to be supplied are in Appendix C.

[Sidenote: Armouries to be available before arms are supplied.]

65. Before any Government arms can be issued, it is necessary that the
Admiralty shall be satisfied that one or more places of security for the
custody of the arms have been provided at the expense of the Volunteers.
The Drill Ships, Coast Guard Stations, or Police Stations will probably
be available in some places for the purpose.

[Sidenote: Application for arms.]

66. Commanding Officers of Corps are to apply for the arms required in
the prescribed Form of Requisition given in Appendix D, addressed to the
Secretary of the Admiralty.

[Sidenote: Marking arms.]

67. The arms of a Brigade will be marked previously to their issue, and
a request to that effect is to be inserted in the requisition on which
the arms are demanded.

No other marks than those on them when issued are on any account to be
put on the arms.

[Sidenote: Responsibility for arms.]

68. All arms issued to the Corps remain the property of Her Majesty's
Government, and the Commanding Officer for the time being is held
responsible for their being at all times in a serviceable state, and for
their being returned into store when required in good condition, fair
wear and tear excepted.

[Sidenote: Cleaning and care of arms.]

69. Great attention should be paid to the proper cleaning and care of
the arms entrusted to the Volunteers, and the Commanding Officers are to
point out to those under their command that, should rust be allowed to
accumulate on any part of a rifle, it must inevitably impair the
accuracy and efficiency of the weapon.

[Sidenote: Depositing arms.]

70. The arms are to be deposited after drill in the armouries of the
Brigade or Corps, except when the Commanding Officer may judge it
expedient to permit members of the Brigade to keep their arms at their
own houses.

As the Commanding Officer is responsible for the condition of the arms,
this permission may be withdrawn by him whenever he may consider it
necessary.

The arms retained in private custody will be subject to inspection at
any time, and they are to be examined at least once in six months by the
Commanding Officer of the Brigade or Officers appointed by him for that
purpose.

[Sidenote: Repairs of arms.]

71. Arms requiring repair are to be deposited with the Gunner of the
Drill Ship to which the Brigade is attached.

[Sidenote: Charge for repairs.]

72. Repairs of arms arising from fair wear, found to be necessary in
order to make the arms serviceable, will be executed free of charge; the
expense of other repairs will be borne by the Corps.

[Sidenote: Allowance of Ammunition.]

73. Ammunition in the following proportion, to be reckoned from the 1st
April in each year, is allowed:--


                               For Guns.

               For each Battery of Brigade    Shot    100
               "      "          "            Shell    25
               "      "          "            Blank    30

or

               For each Trained Man           Shot      4
               "    Efficient                 Shot      2
               And for the Battery            Shell    25
               "       "                      Blank    30


                            For Small Arms.

                                        Gratis. Allowed to   Total.
                                                        be
                                                purchased.

    For every Efficient  Rifled Ball         70         50      120
    for his first year's
    service

                         Blank               10         50       60

                         Pistol             100        100      200

                         Caps               110        110      220

    For every Efficient  Rifled Ball         50         70      120
    after his first
    year's service

                         Blank                          60       60

                         Pistol              50        100      150

                         Caps                60        110      170

[Sidenote: Storing of Ammunition.]

Requisitions for small arm ammunition, in accordance with the
established proportion, are to be forwarded to the Commanding Officer of
the nearest Drill Ship or District Coast Guard Ship for transmission to
the nearest Control Officer. Special demands should be forwarded to the
Secretary of the Admiralty by the Captains of the above ships for
approval, on Form given in Appendix E.

74. Every Brigade is required to provide a secure place for the custody
of its small arm ammunition; but in cases where the store of ammunition
is sufficiently large to make it desirable that it should be stored in
the magazines of any of Her Majesty's ships, used as Drill Ships for the
Volunteers, Commanding Officers of such ships will afford facilities for
its reception.

[Sidenote: Conveyance of Ammunition.]

75. Every care is to be taken in the conveyance and general handling of
ammunition, and the Regulations and customs of the Royal Navy in that
respect are to be strictly adhered to.

[Sidenote: Metal Cylinders, &c.]

76. Metal cylinders, or leather cartridge cases, for conveying the
surplus ammunition collected from the pouches of Volunteers, under the
provisions of Article 61, will be supplied at cost price.

[Sidenote: Return of articles unserviceable or obsolete.]

77. No article of equipment will be returned into store for the purpose
of being replaced, until it has become thoroughly unserviceable. No
articles will be returned into store on account of being of an obsolete
pattern without the authority of the Admiralty.

[Sidenote: Stores lost or injured to be paid for.]

78. All arms or other stores supplied free of cost and placed in the
custody of the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers, are, if lost,
destroyed, or injured by fault or neglect, to be paid for by the Corps.

[Sidenote: Demands for Stores.]

79. All demands for stores, in accordance with the established
proportion allowed, are to be made out in the War Office Forms in use in
Her Majesty's Navy, and are to be forwarded by the Commanding Officers
of Brigades to the nearest Drill Ship or Coast Guard Ship for
transmission to the nearest Control Officer. Special demands should be
forwarded to the Secretary of the Admiralty for approval by the Captains
of the above-named ships.


                                 DRILL.

[Sidenote: Nature of.]

80. The drills of the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers will comprise the
drills for Great Guns, Rifle, Pistol, and Cutlass, as in the Royal Navy,
and no deviation from those drills is to be permitted.

[Sidenote: By whom to be carried out.]

81. All drills will be carried out by the Instructors attached to the
Brigades under the Officer Instructor, and when on board any of Her
Majesty's ships they will be also subject to the supervision of the
Commanding Officer of the ship.

[Sidenote: Qualification for "Efficient."]

82. The qualification necessary for an Efficient will be found in the
Appendix F, and may be amended as the Admiralty may from time to time
think necessary.

[Sidenote: Badge of Efficiency.]

83. A Badge of Efficiency will be worn by men who were returned as
"Efficient" in the last Annual Return of the Brigade.

The Badge will consist of a chevron of silver lace worn on the right arm
above the wrist.

Men who have been five times returned as efficient may wear one star,
and those who have been returned ten times may wear two stars above the
badge.

[Sidenote: Trained Man.]

84. Volunteers who pass the examination for Trained Man, as in the Royal
Navy, will be so designated, and will wear two chevrons of silver lace
on the right arm above the wrist.

[Sidenote: Non-efficients to attend drills.]

85. Every Volunteer must attend at least two drills a month until he has
obtained the standard of an "Efficient."

[Sidenote: Firing practice to be superintended.]

86. No firing practice with great guns is to be carried on by
Volunteers, except under the superintendence of an Officer of the Royal
Navy, or of an Officer Instructor of Volunteers, unless a relaxation of
this rule has been especially sanctioned by the Admiralty.

[Sidenote: Precautions when at gun-practice.]

87. Sword bayonets are not to be worn at gun-drill, or when moving
powder.

No smoking is on any account to be allowed in the vicinity of magazines
or cases containing powder.

No persons are to be allowed to congregate round barrels or cases
containing powder.

Powder cases or barrels are not to be opened either inside a magazine,
or immediately outside the door.


                              ALLOWANCES.

[Sidenote: On actual service.]

88. When on actual service the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers will
receive the same pay, allowances, and victuals as the Officers and
Continuous Service Seamen of the ranks and ratings in the Royal Navy of
relative rank, and will have the same means of allotting pay to wives,
relatives and friends, and whilst on actual service will be treated in
the same manner in every respect.

[Sidenote: Not on actual service.]

89. When not on actual service and embarked on board any of Her
Majesty's ships for more than forty-eight hours, the Volunteers will be
victualled for the whole time they are so embarked, or receive
compensation for provisions at the rate of 1_s._ 6_d._ per day; but when
they are embarked for less than forty-eight hours, they will not receive
victuals or an allowance in lieu.

[Sidenote: Wounds or injuries on service or drill.]

90. If a Volunteer is wounded or injured on service or on drill, he will
be entitled to the same pension to which any seamen in Her Majesty's
Navy would be entitled for a similar wound or injury; or if killed,
slain, or drowned on service, or on drill, his widow (if any) will be
entitled to the same gratuities, out of Greenwich Hospital Funds as the
widow of any other Seamen of the Navy of the same rating.

[Sidenote: Hospital or Sick Quarters.]

91. Volunteers taken seriously ill or injured whilst undergoing drill,
may be sent to a Naval Hospital or Sick Quarters for treatment.

[Sidenote: Applications for Pensions.]

92. Applications for pensions or compensations for injuries or hurts
received whilst on service or drill, are to be specially made to the
Admiralty; the nature and cause of the injury are to be fully reported,
and the names of the witnesses, as also whether blame was attributable
to the Volunteer making the application, when the case will be
considered as it deserves.

[Sidenote: Purchase of clothing, &c.]

93. Volunteers are allowed to purchase at the Government rate any
clothing or necessaries that may be requisite for their outfit or dress
as belonging to the Corps.


                            PERMANENT STAFF.

[Sidenote: Composition.]

94. The Permanent Staff of a Brigade will consist of one Officer
Instructor to the Brigade, and one Petty Officer Instructor for each
Battery composing the Brigade.

[Sidenote: Appointment.]

95. The appointments to the Permanent Staff will be made by the
Admiralty, and will be tenable for a term of five years, or for such
lesser period that the Admiralty may think fit.

[Sidenote: Officer whence selected.]

96. The Officer Instructor will be commissioned as Lieutenant in the
Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers, and will be selected from Officers of,
or retired from, the Royal Navy, of and above the rank of Lieutenant.

[Sidenote: Qualification.]

97. The Officer Instructor will be required to undergo a course of
Instruction in one of the Gunnery Ships to qualify him for the duties of
Instructor in Heavy and Truck Gun Drills, Rifle, Pistol and Cutlass
Exercises.

[Sidenote: Not to hold other appointment.]

98. As the services of an Officer Instructor will be at all times
required by the Volunteers, he will not be permitted to follow any
profession or appointment, public or private.

[Sidenote: Age.]

99. No Officer whose age exceeds 50 years is eligible for the
appointment of Officer Instructor.

[Sidenote: Rank and position.]

100. An Officer Instructor of Naval Volunteers is purely a Staff
Officer, and except for the purpose of Instruction, is not entitled, by
virtue of his superior rank, to take the command of any Force of Naval
Volunteers, when an Officer of the Corps is present.

[Sidenote: General duties.]

101. An Officer Instructor is appointed to give Instruction to the
Volunteers. He is subject to the orders of his Commanding Officer, and
he is required to assist him in carrying on the naval duties of the
Brigade; but he is not to take any part in the civil affairs of the
Brigade.

It is his duty to keep the muster-rolls of the Brigade, and to make
himself acquainted with all the members of Brigade, and their
qualifications and dispositions.

He is to superintend the drills and exercises of the Brigade, and is to
have complete control over the Petty Officer Instructors of the several
Batteries, and is responsible to the Admiralty that their duties are
properly performed, and that the drills are in accordance with those
laid down for the Royal Navy.

[Sidenote: Diary.]

102. The Officer Instructor is required to keep a diary of the
Instruction imparted by him to the Volunteers according to Form G
Appendix. This diary is to be certified by the Commanding Officer of the
Brigade, and transmitted to the Admiralty on the 1st of every month.

[Sidenote: Control over Petty Officer Instructors.]

103. The Officer Instructor will, under the Commanding Officer of the
Brigade, have control over the Petty Officer Instructors, both as
regards their discipline and their duties as Instructors; and he will,
should he have occasion, report any misconduct or incompetency of a
Petty Officer Instructor to the Admiralty.


                       PETTY OFFICER INSTRUCTORS.

[Sidenote: Rank and position.]

104. The Petty Officer Instructors will have the rank First Class Petty
Officers in the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteer Force, and will be
selected from Pensioned Petty Officers of the Royal Navy and must hold a
Certificate from one of the Gunnery Ships of competency as an Instructor
in Heavy and Truck Gun Drill, Rifle, Pistol and Cutlass Exercises.

They will be purely Staff Petty Officers, and will not be entitled, by
virtue of their superior rank, to take the command of any of the Naval
Volunteers, when a Petty Officer of the Corps is present, except for the
purpose of instruction.

[Sidenote: Duties.]

105. The Petty Officer Instructors are to give instruction to the
Volunteers under the direction of the Officer Instructor. They are
subject to the Command of their superior Officers of the Naval
Volunteers, and are to assist them in carrying on their Naval duties,
but they are not to take any part in the civil affairs of the Brigade.

[Sidenote: Conduct.]

106. The Petty Officer Instructors will be expected, on all occasions,
to set an example of what the Naval Volunteers should attain to, and
they will only be allowed to retain their position so long as they
conduct themselves as Petty Officers of the Royal Navy should do.

They are to consider the Officer Instructor as their immediate head, and
apply to him in all matters that may be necessary.

[Sidenote: Diary.]

107. The Petty Officers Instructors will each keep a diary of the
instruction imparted by him to the Volunteers according to Form in
Appendix H. This diary is to be certified by the Commanding Officer of
the Battery, and transmitted weekly to the Officer Instructor.

[Sidenote: Pay of Permanent Staff.]

108. The Permanent Staff will receive pay as follows:--

        Officer Instructor        10_s._ per day.
        Petty Officer Instructor  3_s._    "


                         Uniform For Officers.

109. The Uniform to be worn by the Royal Naval Artillery Volunteers is
to be of the same pattern as for Officers of the corresponding ranks in
the Royal Navy, with the following exceptions viz.:

[Sidenote: Distinctive lace.]

110. Instead of each distinctive stripe of half-inch gold lace round the
sleeve, there is to be a stripe formed of two waived lines of
quarter-inch silver braid, running parallel to each other so as to form
bands three-quarters of an inch wide, the blue cloth to show quarter of
an inch between the lines of braid.

[Sidenote: Buttons.]

111. The buttons to be of the Naval Pattern, with the letters R.N. on
one side of the anchor and A.V. on the other side.

The crown and anchor to be gilt, and the remainder of the button silver.

[Sidenote: Epaulettes.]

112. The epaulettes to be silver, and, instead of the anchor on the
epaulette, there is to be a badge consisting of an anchor in the centre,
surrounded by the words "R. N. A. Volunteers," embroidered in gold.

Crown and stars, when worn on the epaulettes, to be embroidered in gold.

[Sidenote: Hat.]

113. Instead of the bullion loop on the cocked hat, the loop to be
formed of two silver braids, waved as on the coat sleeves, and the
tassels to be silver.

[Sidenote: Badge for cap.]

114. The badge for the cap to have the letters R.N. placed on one side
of the anchor, and the letters A.V. on the other side.

The anchor and letters to be embroidered in gold, and the surrounding
laurel leaves in silver. The crown to be embroidered in gold and silver,
as in the Naval Pattern.

[Sidenote: Sword-belt.]

115. The plate of the sword belt and the swivel to be silver. The crown
and anchor on it to be gilt, and the letters R.N.A.V. on each side of
the anchor, also gilt.

[Sidenote: Lace and embroidery.]

116. All lace and embroidery, except where otherwise ordered in these
Regulations, is to be of silver.


                             Dress Uniform.

117. Coat the same as undress.

Trowsers.--The lace on the seam to be silver.

Sword-belt.--The embroidered lines to be silver.

The dress-trowsers and sword-belt to be worn only on such occasions as
are customary in the Royal Navy.


                      Petty Officers and Gunners.

118. The Uniform to be of the same pattern as for Petty Officers and
Seamen of the Royal Navy, with the following exceptions, viz.:--

[Sidenote: Buttons.]

119. The buttons on jackets of Chief Petty Officers to be of silver, the
same as those of the Officers.

The buttons of the Petty Officers and Gunners to be of the same pattern,
but of black horn.

[Sidenote: Trimmings.]

120. The tape trimmings of the white frock to be waved in the same
manner as the braid on the coat sleeves of the Officers.

[Sidenote: Badges.]

121. All badges are to be of silver embroidery on the jackets, and of
silver or white on the blue serge.

On the white frock they are to be blue.

[Sidenote: Cap ribbons.]

122. The cap ribbon to have a crown and anchor in front, with the
letters R.N. on one side of the anchor, and the letters A.V. on the
other.

The crown and anchor and letters to be embroidered in silver on a black
silk ribbon.

The letters to be five-eighths of an inch in size.


                      CORRESPONDENCE AND RETURNS.

123. All official correspondence from the Volunteer Brigades except the
correspondence of the Officer Instructor in his capacity of Instructor,
is to proceed from the Commanding Officer, or to pass through him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




Transcriber's Notes:

Missing or obscured punctuation was corrected.

Typographical errors were silently corrected.

Spelling and hyphenation were made consistent when a predominant form
was found in this book; otherwise it was not changed.

Text in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Organisation of the Royal Naval
Artillery Volunteers Explained, by Thomas Brassey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROYAL NAVAL ARTILLERY VOLUNTEERS ***

***** This file should be named 57226.txt or 57226.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/2/2/57226/

Produced by Brian Coe, David King, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

