The Project Gutenberg EBook of Early Days in Fort Worth, by B. B. Paddock

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Early Days in Fort Worth

Author: B. B. Paddock

Release Date: August 29, 2018 [EBook #57801]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EARLY DAYS IN FORT WORTH ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                              _EARLY DAYS_
                                   IN
                              _FORT WORTH_


             _Much of Which I saw and Part of Which I Was_


                                   By
                             B. B. Paddock

    [Illustration: Fort Worth's First Bank Building]

This 2010 facsimile of the rare first edition is limited to 300 copies.
B.B. Paddock created this work just after 1900, perhaps 1905 or 1906. It
provides early Fort Worth history and is a necessity for a Fort Worth
collection.

                            Albert L. Peters
                               Bookseller
                            P.O. Box 136814
                          Fort Worth, TX 76136

                    E-Mail: petersfortworth@aol.com


I purpose writing a brief history of Fort Worth from the time of its
selection as a military post down to the time within the memory of men
now living, who may be interested in the struggles and sacrifices made
by those who laid the foundation of the City. I purpose giving somewhat
in detail the work of these patriotic, public-spirited men to whom the
present citizenship of the City owe so much.

I am inspired to do this for the reason that so much credit is given by
the uninformed to men to whom no credit is due and so much is withheld
from those who bore the burden and heat of the day in times that tried
men's souls, and to whom no sacrifice was too great, no demand upon
their time or purse too much, if it could be shown that Fort Worth was
to derive a benefit from the expenditure of time or money. The good that
men do should live after them. But men should not have the credit for
deeds done in the body when the deeds were never performed. Obituary
notices are useful as examples to the living, but to be useful they
should be true. Men should not be given credit, even though it may make
pleasant reading to the families of the deceased, for things they did
not do and perhaps had not the means of doing, no matter how willing
they may have been.

In the early days of this city there was among its citizenship a coterie
of men, the like of which were never found in any other community. Their
first and only thought was for the upbuilding of the city. Some of these
men are still living, but most of them have gone to their reward. It is
greatly to be regretted that all could not have lived to see the
culmination of their efforts and to participate in the prosperity which
they helped to bring to the city.

In what follows there shall be found "nothing extenuate, nor aught set
down in malice." It will be "an o'er true tale" as I saw it I do not
hope that this little volume will be complete but that it may serve as a
foundation for some future historian to erect a structure as voluminous
and veracious as Gibbon's Rome or Hume and Smollett's England. As far as
it goes it may be regarded more authentic and reliable than
Knickerbocker's History of New York.




                    FIRST SETTLEMENT OF FORT WORTH.


At the close of the war with Mexico, General Winfield Scott sent a troop
of the Second Dragoons in command of Major Ripley A. Arnold to North
Texas to establish a post to protect the then sparsely settled territory
from the forays of the Indians which then inhabited this section.

Major Arnold selected this as the most central point for this purpose.

The post was first called Camp Worth in honor of Brigadier General
William Jennings Worth. It was established on the sixth day of June,
1849. On November 14th, 1849, the name was changed to Fort Worth, and it
was abandoned on the 17th day of September, 1853, and the troops
stationed here were sent to Fort Belknap, about a mile from the present
site of the town of Belknap. There was never a fort at this point and
the only buildings were the barracks at the head of and a little west of
Houston street.

The first settlement in the county of any magnitude grew up about the
military post and on its abandonment the buildings were used as stores
by those who had settled near the post. Among those who were in business
here were Col. Abe Harris, who at this writing still lives in the city,
the late James F. Ellis and G. P. Farmer who subsequently located a farm
about twelve miles south of the city.

When the soldiers left there was only a meagre country population in the
vicinity; barring a few supply trains no current of trade had yet begun
to flow through this section of Texas. There were no cattle trails;
nothing permanent to arouse enthusiasm for this straggling settlement on
the Trinity Bluff and the seed of civilization planted and protected
during the brief military occupancy, might, on good and relative
grounds, have experienced the same blight that befell Fort Phantom Hill
and Fort Belknap.

But this nucleus of citizens, among whom, besides those named, were E.
M. Daggett, C. M. Peak and John Peter Smith, whose names later became
associated with every enterprise in which the city was interested.

The County was created by the Legislature in December, 1849, and the
county seat was located at Birdville. The spirit of conquest was rife in
the veins of the early settlers and at the instance of Capt. Daggett and
others, the Legislature was induced to permit an election to decide upon
the county seat. Birdville was at that time the larger place. Had the
election been untrammeled it would have probably remained the seat of
government for many years. The citizens of Birdville charged, and there
seems good reason for the charge, that the election of Fort Worth was
brought about by the votes of Sam Woody, the first settler of Wise
County, and the members of his family. Enough was shown to induce the
Legislature to order a second election. About 1855, A. J. Walker who
lived a few miles northeast of Birdville was a member of the State
Senate. He was instrumental in having a bill passed providing for
another election. This occurred about the year 1860. The exact date is
not accessible to the writer. By this time the population of Fort Worth
had increased to sufficient numbers to enable it to make good its claim
as the proper place for the court house. Birdville abandoned its claim
and endeavored to defeat Fort Worth by casting its votes and throwing
its influence for "The center of the county" which would be a little
nearer Birdville than Fort Worth. The vote resulted in 301 for "the
center" and 548 for Fort Worth and the vexed question which has cost the
lives of some and the expenditure of about $30,000 was settled for all
time.




                           ABOUT THE INDIANS.


An effort was made in 1873 to remove all the hostile Indians from Texas
to the Reservation in the Indian Territory. The removal was accomplished
but it was not easy to keep them there, and there were occasional raids
across the border and into the settlements. The exact date of the last
foray is not accessible at this writing, but it was made as far south as
Jack and Young counties, just west of Los Valley where James C. Loving
had a ranch and his residence. The foray was led by two Indian Chiefs,
Santanta and Big Tree. They fell upon a wagon train conveying supplies
to Fort Griffin which stood about fourteen miles northwest of the
present town of Albany. It was owned by Capt. Julian Feild, of this
city, and Henry Warren, of Weatherford. The train was destroyed; the
wagons burned; the mules and horses taken away and several men killed. A
wooden monument marks the place where the encounter took place. Troops
were dispatched after the savages and the two chiefs were captured. They
were tried for murder at Jacksboro and convicted and sentenced to death,
but the sentence was commuted by Edmund J. Davis, then Governor of
Texas, to confinement in the penitentiary for life. Santanta was
afterwards pardoned and at last accounts was still living on the
Reservation near Fort Sill, Oklahoma.

On August 16th, 1874, another raid was made into Texas, coming as far as
Veal's station about three miles west of the present town of Springtown,
where one man was killed. Two others were killed by the same raiders on
the Weatherford and Jacksboro road, about half way between the two
towns. This was the last appearance of hostile Indians in this part of
the State. There were other forays on the borders of New Mexico
subsequent to that time.




                     CREDIT TO WHOM CREDIT IS DUE.


When it comes to calling the roll of patriots who worked so long and
faithfully for the upbuilding of the city one ventures upon dangerous
ground. The memory is at times treacherous and some of the best and
truest are liable to be over-looked. But that their names may be
enshrined in the hearts of the people and perpetuated by this modest
record of the time the chance will be taken. It would be well to dig up
the tax rolls of that day and make a copy of it, for every man in the
city with but one or two conspicuous exceptions was ready at any and all
times to spend and be spent for the good of Fort Worth.

But there were a few who were conspicuous by their liberality whose
names may be mentioned without any invidious distinction as to others
equally worthy. The first of these are the men who donated three hundred
and twenty acres of land lying along the southern border of the city to
the Texas & Pacific Railway Company. These men were E. M. Daggett, Major
K. M. VanZandt, Thos. J. Jennings and H. G. Hendricks. They were the
ones to set the pace for their fellow citizens.

Of those who contributed of their time and money without stint may be
mentioned those whose names are recorded above, who did not stop with
this princely donation and claim that they had done their share; to
these should be added John Peter Smith, Walter A. Huffman, B. C. Evans,
Joseph H. Brown, C. M. Peak, W. H. Davis, William J. Boaz, James F.
Ellis, M. G. Ellis, H. C. Holloway, J. J. Jarvis. M. B. Loyd. W. W.
Dunn. W. P. Burts. E. J. Beall, George Newman, William B. Young, W. B.
Tucker, Stephen Terry, Jesse Jones, Dr. J. F. Shelton, A. J. Chambers,
B. L. Samuels, John Hanna, Porter King, W. A. Darter, Sam Seaton, Sam
Evans, J. C. Terrell and others. These are they who were here before the
advent of the railroad and many of them before there was any talk of a
railroad. When it was definitely settled that the road would be
constructed to this city the people commenced at once to reach out after
other enterprises and it may be truthfully stated that every man, woman
and child helped with time and money. Their names are enshrined in the
heart of every patriotic citizen of Fort Worth.

Among those who came to Fort Worth prior to the advent of the railroad
and who remained and gave of their time and money to advance the
interests of the city to the best of their ability and who witnessed the
culmination of their desires may be mentioned Thos. A. Tidball,
Zane-Cetti, C. K. Fairfax, J. J. Roche, F. J. Tatum, J. S. Godwin, Jas.
H. Field, Dahlman brothers, S. P. Greene, D. C. Bennett, Geo. Mulkey, S.
H. Hulkey, T. C. Boulware, the Pendery brothers, P. J. Bowdry, J. Q.
Sandige, J. Y. Hogsett, Jno. F. Swayne, T. J. Peniston, D. B. Gardner,
Z. E. B. Nash, I. Carb, J. M. Peers, John Nichols, Jere Marklee, J. F.
Cooper, D. C. Bennett, S. T. Bibb, W. T. Maddox, and his brothers R. E.,
E. P., J. H. and a cousin J. M. who now resides in Jack County. There
are others, but their names do not occur to the writer at this time.

Upon the arrival of the railroad and soon after, they came by the
carload. Among the most prominent, and who have been most active in the
upbuilding of the city may be mentioned W. G. Turner, J. B. Burnside, A.
J. Roe, Willard Burton, A. S. Dingee, J. M. Hartsfield, A. J. Anderson,
J. L. Cooper, J. W. Spencer, A. E. Want, E. H. Keller, Neil P. Anderson,
W. G. Newby, W. F. Sterley, C. J. Swasey. Here, again, a lapse of time
and defective memory must be the excuse for not mentioning others
equally worthy.




                     FIRST PROMINENCE OF THE CITY.


Fort Worth first came into prominence in the year 1872. when Col. Thomas
A. Scott, who had come into the ownership and control of the Texas &
Pacific Railway, in company with Col. John W. Forney, the editor and
proprietor of the "Chronicle" of Philadelphia, made a trip across Texas
for the purpose of selecting a route for this road across the State.
Colonel Forney wrote voluminous letters to his paper describing in great
detail what he saw and how he was impressed with the resources of the
State. He afterwards wrote and published a pamphlet entitled "What I Saw
in Texas" which had a wide circulation.

In these letters and in the pamphlet he had much to say about Fort
Worth. In fact, he gave it more space than any other point in the State,
and predicted for it a brilliant future. He did not hesitate to predict
that it would be the most prominent place in the northern part of the
State. It being generally known that he was the guest of Colonel Scott
on the trip, it was quite natural that his readers should reach the
conclusion that he reflected the opinion of the President of the Railway
Company.

A secondary purpose of the trip across Texas and the presence of Mr.
Forney, then among the foremost editorial writers of the day, was to
educate the public and to influence it in favor of a grant or subsidy
from the general government in aid of the construction of the road, such
as had been granted to the Union Pacific Railroad. A bill was then
pending in Congress for this purpose. Forney's paper as well as others
in the east set forth with great emphasis that this line would be of
greater benefit to the nation at large than the more northern route,
inasmuch as it was in a more southerly latitude and would be open for
traffic every day of the year, and would not be snowbound as it was
contended the more northern line would be at certain seasons of the
year.

Col. Scott commenced the active work of construction westward from
Marshall and Jefferson immediately on his return from the Pacific slope
and prosecuted it with all possible energy. He had associated with him
General Grenville M. Dodge who was the chief engineer of the Union
Pacific and Mr. Frank S. Bond who was the financial director of the same
road. The road was constructed as fast as men and money could do the
work and every argument that could be devised was put forth to persuade
representatives in Congress that this line was of prime necessity to the
commerce of the country.

Representatives of the company attended every convention of importance
that was held in the country and resolutions were adopted urging
Congress to grant the southern route the same concessions that had been
given the northern line.

Meanwhile Col. Scott and his associates were bending every energy to
secure capital for the construction of the road. In the summer of 1873,
Scott went to Europe on this mission. It was reported, from what was
regarded as reliable sources, that he had interested English capital in
the enterprise and every one in North Texas was rejoicing in his
success. It was stated that so confident was Col. Scott that he had
provided a dinner at which all who were in London, interested in the
enterprise, participated in celebrating his success. While the dinner
was in progress a cablegram was received announcing the suspension of
the financial house of Jay Cooke & Co. This firm was the financial house
of the general government at that time. It was they who had carried on
the negotiations for the United States during the war and who had
handled and marketed the bonds issued to support the armies of the
United States in that great contest. This had given it the widest
reputation throughout the world and its failure wrought havoc in
financial circles everywhere. Very naturally it put an end to Scott's
negotiations and he returned to this country very much dejected but not
at all dismayed or discouraged.

It was a dark day for Fort Worth. The news fell upon this city like a
thunder bolt from a clear sky. From the highest point of expectancy the
people descended into the lowest depths of despondency.

When the work of the road had reached a point west of its eastern
terminal this side of Marshall, Fort Worth commenced to grow. People
came to the city from all points, but more numerously from Kansas and
Missouri. But they came from everywhere and bought property, built
houses and engaged in business. From the fall of 1872 to that of 1873,
Fort Worth grew from a little hamlet of a few hundred into a bustling
city of three or four thousand. Rents were fabulous and business in all
lines was active. Fortunes were made in real estate and corner lots
would double in value in a night.

But the first day of September, the day of the suspension of Jay Cooke &
Co. told another story. Values declined with as much rapidity as they
had grown up. People who had invested their money and paid a part in
cash and gave their notes for the remainder; who had commenced the
erection of houses that they were never to see finished; who had ordered
and in many instances received stocks of goods for which there was no
market saw bankruptcy staring them in the face. Professional men from
all over the country had left comfortable homes and good business to
come here and begin their fortunes anew, faced inevitable ruin. The
population dwindled as rapidly as it had grown. Stores and dwellings
were vacated by the score. Business was at a standstill and gloom and
despondency was everywhere visible. The road to the eastward was filled
with people who were leaving the town in as large numbers as a few days
previous they had sought it.

Meanwhile the road to which so many looked with expectancy and hope was
nearing Dallas. It was completed to about Forney, east of Dallas, and
the work was continued until the road reached Eagle Ford, six miles west
of Dallas, when it was discontinued and the forces disbanded. Eagle Ford
which had sprung into a town of more than a thousand was as quickly
depopulated--the people for the most part moving back to Dallas. It was
the opportunity for that city. Had the panic broken thirty days later so
that it would have been practicable to have completed the road to Fort
Worth before suspending operations, Dallas would have been a good county
seat town instead of a thriving city and Fort Worth would today have
been a city of a quarter of a million population.

The decimation of Fort Worth left here about one thousand people. Many
of them stayed because they could not well get away. Others remained
because their faith in the ultimate growth and preeminence of the city
was not shaken by this disaster. They went to work with a grim
determination to make a city of Fort Worth and how well they performed
the task, many still living, well remember. Their names are household
words with the older citizens and will never be forgotten. They are
inscribed on the tablets of their memories never to be effaced.

A great number of those who left Fort Worth at that time went to Dallas.
Some of them have become prominent factors in the development of the
city. There was little or no business left to Fort Worth, except the
spring cattle drive. That brought business to a few. The town was dead
as far as business and development went. The grass literally grew in the
streets. This was not a metaphor to indicate stagnation, but a doleful
fact. There were more empty stores and vacant dwellings than those that
were occupied. The people busied themselves principally with an effort
to devise ways and means to secure a railroad and with politics in which
they took an interest that was keen and constant. Town meetings were
almost of weekly occurrence, and a sufficient number of resolutions were
adopted and committees appointed to have built the embankments for a
road to Dallas if they could have been utilized for that purpose. The
faith of the people never wavered for a moment. It was with them
constantly and under all circumstances. They never failed to sing the
praises of the city and to predict its glorious future. Volumes were
written and distributed telling of the glorious future that waited upon
those who believed and remained with the city.

Among those who left the place when the cyclone hit it was a young
lawyer who had come hither from Georgia. One Robert E. Cowart. He went
to Dallas where he still lives and is one of the promoters of the scheme
to get deep water in the Trinity at that place. Cowart was, and is, a
bright man. He has a keen sense of the ridiculous and verbiage that can
make an Indian's hair curl. He lived long enough in Fort Worth to become
acquainted with the peculiarities of its people. It was he who furnished
the facts that gave Fort Worth the name of the "Panther City." Knowing
the conditions that prevailed here, he wrote a communication for the
Dallas Herald, then the leading paper of North Texas, telling of the
discovery of a panther in the streets of Fort Worth, and the action
taken by the people.

No attempt was made to deny or explain the charge. It was accepted as a
fact. The town was by common consent christened "Pantherville." Every
one named every thing "Panther." There were "panther" stores, "panther"
meat markets, "panther" saloons. The "Democrat," a weekly paper, being
printed here, secured a cut of a panther couchant, which it displayed at
the head of the paper. A fire company organized at about that time named
the engine the "Panther." Two panther cubs were advertised for and
secured by the local paper and they were housed in a handsome cage at
the firehall. When, a little later, Dallas gave a big celebration or
demonstration of some kind, the wagon with the panthers were taken over
there, drawn by four white horses and escorted by forty good and
patriotic citizens of the town clad in white uniforms. It was easily the
most attractive part of the procession on that occasion. Fort Worth is
still known as "Pantherville," or the "Panther City."




                       FORT WORTH BECOMES A CITY.


It has been stated that having nothing better to do--and there are few
better things to do--the people took an active interest in politics. The
first political movement of importance occurring about that time was the
incorporation of the city. The Thirteenth Legislature in which Major K.
M. VanZandt represented this county, passed an act authorizing the
incorporation and the people were active in the preparation of a
charter. Meetings were held almost nightly in the Court House for this
purpose. The most active participants were John Y. Hogsett and Frank W.
Ball who represented the conflicting opinions.

The charter was effective March 1st, 1873, and the first city election
was held on the third day of April, following. The opposing candidates
for mayor were Dr. W. P. Burts and P. M. Thurmond. The election was
spirited and exciting. Most of the more recent citizens were for
Thurmond who was himself a "new comer" as they were designated. When the
votes were counted Dr. Burts was elected by a majority of 68 votes. The
total vote being 366. The other officials were, Ed. Terrell, Marshal; N.
M. Maben, Assessor and Collector; F. W. Ball, City Attorney and J. F.
Swayne, City Secretary. The Board of Aldermen were, M. B. Loyd, M. D.
McCall, A. Blakeney, W. J. Boaz and A. G. Rintleman. There were twenty
candidates for alderman, all of whom but two have answered the last
roll-call and passed over the river.

When the panic of 1873 fell upon the country the city government
suspended business as far as practicable. The city officials agreed to
draw no salaries and depended on the fees of the Mayor's Court for
whatever compensation they received. All ordinances were suspended
except those pertaining to the preservation of the peace. The city
election was held at the proper time when Dr. Burts was re-elected. The
following comprised the official roster: T. M. Ewing, City Marshal; John
S. Loving, Treasurer; Theo. Hitchcock, Secretary; G. F. Parnham,
Collector and J. L. Chapman, City Attorney. The Aldermen were R. H.
King. A. B. Fraser. W. H. Overton, W. H. Williams and Joseph H. Kane.

Among the defeated candidates for aldermen were: W. J. Boaz and J. P.
Alexander, who stood for re-election and Col. J. P. Smith. Ewing
resigned as City Marshal the following December and at an election for
his successor T. P. Redding, N. M. Maben and H. P. Shiel were the
candidates. Redding received 47 votes and Maben and Shiel 68 votes each.
Another election was ordered and Redding withdrew and Columbus
Fitzgerald, who had been the deputy of Ewing entered the race and went
off with the goods.

At the succeeding election Capt. G. H. Day and J. F. Cooper were the
rival candidates for mayor. Day received 206 votes and Cooper 136. J. C.
Scott was elected City Attorney; C. McDougall. City Secretary; H. P.
Shiel, City Marshal; G. F. Parmer, Assessor and Collector; J. S. Loving,
Treasurer. The Board of Aldermen were W. T. Maddox, P. J. Bowdry, D. R.
Crawford, Isaac Dahlman and J. J. Jarvis.

Much interest was manifested in this election because of the alleged
profligacy of the former administration. The city debt had been run up
to the mammoth sum of $4,952.91 and something had to be done or the city
would be financially ruined. There was also a delinquent tax list of
$19.85 showing a gross lack of attention to city affairs by those in
authority.

The next city election was probably the most exciting political contest
ever pulled off in this city. Capt. Day, who had been twice mayor, was
not in favor with a large number of people and a herculean effort was
made to defeat him. The aspirations of several good men was a serious
handicap to their efforts. The contest finally settled down to Day,
Larry Steele and John D. Templeton. When the ballots were counted it was
found that Day and Templeton were tied and Steele three votes behind
them. A second election was ordered and Steele was prevailed upon to
withdraw. The result was another tie and a third election was ordered.
Interested parties began to scan the poll lists to ascertain if any
fraudulent or illegal votes had been cast when the discovery was made
that B. B. Paddock, who then lived where he now does, at the corner of
Jennings Avenue and Terrell Avenue, and Hugh W. Davis, who lived across
the street from him where John Laneri now lives, and both of whom were
outside of the city limits had voted in each election. Both were and had
been active in city affairs and it had not occurred to them that they
were not citizens of the city and allowed to participate in the election
and Day was elected by three votes. Paddock and Davis had to behave
themselves for a season and were threatened with prosecution for illegal
voting every time they became too active in matters that did not concern
them.

At the succeeding election Day was beaten by Col. R. E. Beckham, who
held the place for two terms when he declined to again be a candidate.
Col. John Peter Smith was chosen as his successor. This is enough on
this subject, although there were other and interesting contests in the
late 80's and early 90's.




                               RAILROADS.


A volume might be written upon the struggles that Fort Worth went
through in securing the railroads that have contributed so much to its
growth and success. Mention has already been made of the failure of the
Texas & Pacific to reach Fort Worth on schedule time. A land grant had
been given the road by the State conditioned on its being completed to
Fort Worth by the first day of January, 1874. Generous and public
Spirited citizens of the city, Maj. K. M. VanZandt, E. B. Daggett, Thos.
J. Jennings and H. G. Hendricks had donated three hundred and twenty
acres of land lying along the south side of the city upon the same
conditions. As each succeeding legislature met, it extended the time for
the construction of the road for a year, and the grant of lands by the
above named citizens was renewed. This continued until the
Constitutional Convention of 1875, which passed a resolution further
extending the time until the adjournment of the First Legislature held
under the new Constitution.

This session of the Legislature convened on the second Tuesday of
January, 1876. Tarrant county was represented in that body by the Hon.
Nicholas Darnell, who had also been a member of the Convention that
framed the Constitution. In the meantime the people of this city
despairing of the road being constructed by the company, undertook to
build it themselves. They organized "The Tarrant County Construction
Company" and subscribed to the capital stock, assuming to make payment
in money, labor, material, forages, supplies or anything they had which
possessed a marketable value. A contract was entered into with the
railway company for the construction of the road from Eagle Ford, its
western terminus, to this city. The contract was let to Roche Bros. &
Tierney, of which firm J. J. Roche is still surviving and a citizen of
the city. The work was commenced in the fall of 1875. Maj. K. M.
VanZandt was the President of the company, John S. Hirshfield,
Vice-President; Zane-Cetti, Secretary and W. A. Huffman, Treasurer.

When the Legislature assembled, the railway company made application for
still another extension, but the opposition to it was very pronounced
and had a large following. It soon became evident that a sufficient
number of votes could not be secured to obtain the extension. The
company had expended large sums of money in surveying and platting the
lands in the west which amounted to sixteen sections per mile. It was
too rich a prize to abandon without a struggle. The company took the
contract off the hands of The Construction Company and put forth every
energy to the construction of the road to this place with a view to its
completion to this city before the Legislature should conclude its
labors and adjourn. Gen. John C. Brown, of Tennessee, was the
Vice-President of the company and he was on the ground day and night, if
his services were necessary. Maj. D. W. Washburn, the chief engineer,
was equally active and the contractor, Morgan Jones, is said not to have
changed his clothes or gone regularly to bed during that period of
unexampled activity. The Legislature had finished its labors early in
July and the Senate had passed a concurrent resolution of adjournment
and sent it over to the House. The rails of the Texas & Pacific were
many miles east of Fort Worth. An adjournment of the Legislature meant
the sacrifice of the magnificent landed domain which it had surveyed and
platted. Then commenced the most strenuous parliamentary battle recorded
in the history of this or any other state. The friends of the railway
company refused to adopt the resolution to adjourn. The vote was so
close that the absence of a single friend of the company might mean
disaster. Gen. Darnell, the member from this county, was one of those
who voted against adjournment and the General was sick. He was carried
into the hall every day, on a cot, and voted "no" on the resolution to
adjourn sine die; and voted "aye" on a motion to adjourn till the
following day. This was continued for fifteen days. The rails had
reached Sycamore creek just east of the city. Here was a long bridge and
a still longer trestle. The latter has since been filled up. Bridge
timbers and ties were converted into a crib upon which the rails were
laid. Then the track left the grade and took to the dirt road which ran
nearly parallel to the right of way. Ties were laid on the ground
supported at either end by stones picked up from the right of way and
the rails spiked to them. It was as crooked as the proverbial ram's
horn, but it bore up the rails. On the 19th day of July, at 11:23
o'clock a. m., the first train ran into Fort Worth. The train was in
charge of Conductor W. R. Bell who still pulls a rope on the T. & P. and
draws a monthly pay check therefrom. Mr. L. S. Thorne, subsequently
Vice-President and General Manager, had charge of the head brake.
Engineer Kelly, the father of Jack Kelly, who is now the Travelling
Engineer of the Fort Worth & Denver, was at the throttle. The name of
the rest of the crew is not obtainable at this writing.

It was a day of great rejoicing in Fort Worth and the gallant band who
had manifested so much patriotism and faith and worked so assiduously
for the city came into their reward. A great demonstration was had.
Lacking cannon, anvils were obtained from the shop of W. H.
Williams--for whom E. H. Kellar worked as an apprentice--Maj. J. J.
Jarvis was chief of artillery with P. J. Bowdry as his able assistant.
Business of every kind became active and the city commenced to grow and
prosper. Buildings of every kind and character were in great demand and
new ones were constructed as fast as men and money could erect them.

Pending the long wait for the Texas & Pacific other roads had been
chartered and organized. The Fort Worth & Denver City was the first of
these. It was organized August 12th, 1873. Its personnel came from the
active forces of the M. K. & T. and the Texas & Pacific. The first
President was J. M. Eddy, of the "Katy." W. W. H. Lawrence was
Vice-President and C. L. Frost, Secretary and Treasurer. It maintained
its organization intact during the period of depression and was found
ready for business when the effects of the panic were dissipated.

The Red River & Rio Grande from Denison to the Gulf was chartered as was
the Fort Worth, Corsicana & Beaumont. The first of these was absorbed by
the M. K. & T. and the latter was never given vitality, but later the
Fort Worth & New Orleans was organized and built by Fort Worth people.

M. C. Hurley and J. J. Roche both still living and residents of the city
were active participants in the promotion and construction of this road.
It was later absorbed by the Southern Pacific System, where the
ownership still remains.

The Gulf, Colorado & Santa Fe railway entered Fort Worth on the second
day of December, 1881. In the meantime work had commenced on the Fort
Worth & Denver City railway, which was chartered as early as 1873, and
the construction of which was delayed by the same panic that had wrought
such havoc to the fortunes of the Texas & Pacific. The grading was
commenced on this road in November, 1881, at or near the present station
of Hodge. The first rail was laid the following February and the work
was prosecuted with vigor until the road reached the State line at
Texline, where it met the Denver & New Orleans, which had been
constructed from the City of Denver.

The M. K. & T. came into Fort Worth over the rails of the
Trans-Continental Division of the Texas & Pacific in the early part of
1880. It continues to use the same line, there being a joint ownership
thereof.

On November 23d, 1886, work was commenced on The Fort Worth & Rio
Grande, a company organized and promoted by the writer.

In 1887-8 the "Cotton Belt" made its advent into this city and in the
90's came the Rock Island, the Frisco and the I. & G. N. The Trinity &
Brazos Valley followed soon after using the Santa Fe rails between this
city and Cleburne and later the Rock Island between this place and
Dallas.




                          PUBLIC FREE SCHOOLS.


Many erroneous statements have been made from time to time about the
organization of the Public Free School System of this city. Credit for
this work has been ascribed by different persons to almost every one
that ever had anything to do with the schools, and to some that never
had anything to do with them, except, perhaps what they were paid to do
out of the school funds of the city.

The truth of history makes it necessary to say that credit for the
initial work essential to the organization is due more than to any one
else to Major K. M. VanZandt, Dr. Carroll M. Peak and to the Fort Worth
Democrat.

As early as January, 1877, the Democrat commenced a campaign for an
independent school system in this city. It appealed to the City Council
to order an election to ascertain whether the people desired to take
control of the schools. The necessary resolutions were passed and an
election ordered for the 28th day of February, with Dr. Peak as
presiding officer. The election was held at which 90 votes were cast; 85
for and 5 against the proposition.

When it was proposed to organize, it was contended that a city of less
than 10,000 population could not become an independent school district.
As Fort Worth had less than half this number of people, the project was
abandoned until the early part of 1882. All during the interim the
persons mentioned were working in favor of the independent schools. It
was known that there was opposition to the special tax for school
purposes.

In February, 1882, the Council was again appealed to. This time to have
a special census taken to ascertain if the requisite number of people
lived in Fort Worth to authorize an independent district. The Council
objected to this on account of funds. The writer of these lines agreed
to do the work of supervision and Col. Smith and Maj. VanZandt furnished
the money to pay the enumerators. The work was done efficiently for the
sum of $300.00 and there were found in Fort Worth 11,136 people. A. E.
Want was one of the enumerators who took this census. An election was
then ordered to levy a special tax to supplement the school fund. Dr.
Peak was on the streets, in season and out of season, urging the tax and
it was approved by a very handsome majority. There were only 35 votes
cast against the proposition, but from the noise made by the opponents,
many more were anticipated.

The first School Trustees were J. J. Jarvis, John Hanna and W. H.
Baldridge. The school opened in October with about 650 pupils.

An advertisement was inserted in the local papers and those in Saint
Louis for a superintendent. There were thirty-two applications filed and
some of the applicants came in person to interview the trustees. After
much deliberation and discussion Prof. Alexander Hogg, of Marshall, was
elected at a salary of $1200 per annum. He entered upon his duties at
the Fall opening of the schools. The following teachers were selected:

Principals: Mrs. Clara Walden, Miss Sue Huffman and Thos. Lacey.

First Grade: Miss Jennie Oliver, Emma Hildebrand, Pinka Jones, Ida Rich
and Mrs. M. L. Pearcy.

Second Grade: Miss Bessie Foute, Jennie Howard, R. Madden, Eva Haywood,
Clara Burnham, Maud P. Johnson, Lula Dial and J. N. Lacey.

There was in the Available School Fund $3,906 and the Board announced
that with the special tax levy a school could be conducted ten months in
the year.




                               CHURCHES.


When the writer came to Fort Worth in October, 1872, the only church
edifice in the town was that of the Christian church which occupied the
center of the block bounded by Main and Houston, Fourth and Fifth
streets. It was a small brick structure but of ample proportions to
accommodate the small congregation that worshipped there. Elder J. A.
Clark filled the pulpit.

The Presbyterians had no organization at that time, but one was
perfected early in the year 1873 and there were services once a month by
an evangelist who lived at Waxahachie. Very soon Rev. W. M. Kilpatrick,
who was traveling through North Texas with his family, in a covered
wagon, was called by this denomination and thereafter it had regular
services in a room over Knight's livery stable, which stood about the
corner of Calhoun and Third streets.

The Methodists worshipped every Sunday morning and evening at the Court
House with Rev. R. R. H. Burnett as pastor.

The Baptists under Rev. J. R. Masters met on the first and second
Sundays at the Masonic building, which stood in the middle of Belknap
street, near the corner of Elm.

The Cumberland Presbyterians held one meeting in the month at the same
place with Rev. W. D. Wear as pastor.

The Catholics met on the last Sunday of the month at the residence of
Mr. Scott, on Main street, Father Parrier being their priest.

On May 15th, 1874, the Methodists commenced the erection of a place of
worship at the corner of Fourth and Grove streets, where they remained
until their present commodious and imposing structure was erected.

The Baptists started the building of their first church on the 15th day
of August, 1874. The building was erected on the grounds where the City
Hall now stands.

In May, 1877, the Presbyterians commenced the erection of a commodious
edifice at the corner of Fourth and Jones streets. B. B. Paddock, J. P.
Alexander, J. M. Hartsfield, S. P. Greene and J. C. Scott composed the
building committee. It was described by a local writer of the day as
"handsome and commodious." It must have been, as its dimensions were
30x50 feet and would seat 350 people.

The Episcopalians seem to have left no record that is accessible of
their early work, but it is known that they were here, though in small
numbers. They must have made up in enthusiasm what they lacked in
numbers for it is recorded that on November 23d, 1877, they purchased a
lot at the corner of Rusk at Fifth street for the fabulous sum of
$325.00 and announced that they would proceed to build a church edifice.
They kept the promise. It was occupied for the first time on the 12th
day of February, 1878. It was dedicated April 15th, 1878. It was
reported to have a seating capacity of 280.

As an evidence of the change that time has wrought in church matters, it
is recorded that the Rev. M. D. Fly tendered his resignation as pastor
of the First Methodist church in September, 1878, giving as a reason for
his action that he could not live on $275.00 per year. That must have
been before W. J. Boaz joined the church and before George Mulkey made
his "stake."




                             FRATERNITIES.


Fort Worth Lodge, Number 148, A. F. & A. M., is the largest and
wealthiest Masonic lodge in the state. It was constituted April 14th,
1854, "Under Dispensation" issued by M. W. Grand Master Wm. M. Taylor on
the 18th day of March, 1854, and chartered January 18th, 1855. Julian
Feild was the first Worshipful Master and John Peter Smith its first
Secretary. Its first home was a two story brick structure which stood in
the middle of Belknap street, at the intersection of Elm street. The
lower story was used for school and church purposes. The writer of these
pages is the Senior Past Master of the Lodge at this time. W. H. Feild,
the present Secretary has filled that position for about thirty years,
the last twenty-five of which have been consecutive.

There was a small lodge of the I. O. O. F., but no record of its
official roster is accessible to the writer at this time.




                          KNIGHTS OF PYTHIAS.


The first meeting held to perfect an organization of a Lodge of Knights
of Pythias was on July 23d, 1877.

Queen City Lodge No. 21 was organized August 17th, 1877, with G. M.
Otten, P. C.; T. S. Levy, C. C.; Max Elser, V. C.; Chas. Gay, M. of A.

Red Cross Lodge No. 14 was organized February 26th, 1881, with S.
Rosenfield, P. C.; W. R. Gause, C. C.; C. K. Fairfax, V. C.; H. P.
Purnell, M. of A.

The lodges at once took up the matter of the erection of a Castle Hall.
Committees were appointed and subscriptions obtained as far as possible
and a bond and mortgage placed on the property for $12,000, bearing
twelve per cent interest.

The corner stone was laid on the sixth day of June, 1881, with
impressive ceremonies under the direction of Supreme Chancellor Justin
H. Rathbone, of Washington City.

The lodges formed in procession at the corner of Fourth and Main streets
and marched to Weatherford street, thence to Houston, thence to Fourth,
thence to Main, thence to Third at the corner of which the Castle Hall
was to be erected.

C. K. Fairfax was the Grand Marshal. Sir Knight Rathbone rode in a
carriage handsomely decorated with the colors of the order and on either
side of the carriage rode two knights in full armor. These were Knight
Louis J. Elser, of Corsicana, and Knight E. M. Alvord, of Red Cross
Lodge.

Arriving at the site the ceremony of laying the corner stone was had by
Knight Justin H. Rathbone. Knight R. E. Beckham of Queen City Lodge
delivered the oration.

The following articles were placed in the corner stone: Roster of Queen
City Lodge; Roster of Red Cross Lodge; Names of Officers of Supreme
Lodge; Names of Officers of the Grand Lodge; Pieces of gold, silver and
paper currency and copies of the papers printed in the city.

At night an interesting and instructive lecture was delivered by Knight
Rathbone at the Presbyterian church.

Interest on the bonded debt was met promptly and at their maturity were
taken up by a new bond for a much smaller amount at a lower rate of
interest. This was the first Castle Hall built in the World.




                              WATER WORKS.


The work of supplying the city with water was agitated early in its
history, but nothing definite was accomplished. The necessity for fire
protection was imperative as the city was composed exclusively of wooden
structures. Cisterns were sunk in the streets, one on Main street
between First and Second; one on Houston street north of Weatherford.
These were kept filled from rain water as far as possible and were
guarded with exceeding great care that the water should not be wasted or
diverted from the purpose for which it was intended. Water for domestic
purposes was delivered by wagon and was obtained from the Clear Fork and
from the Cold Spring on the Trinity, on the Birdville road.

Numerous propositions were submitted to the people at different times,
and varied in cost from $24,600 to $50,000 and provided for from three
quarters of a mile to one mile of pipe line.

It was not until May, 1882, that a franchise was granted by the city to
a company composed of B. B. Paddock, M. B. Loyd, Zane-Cetti, John D.
Templeton and W. P. Wilson for the construction of a water works system.
It provided for about six miles of mains and forty fire hydrants. Mr.
Paddock had enlisted the influence and interest of the Holly Water Works
Company, of Lockhart, New York, who were represented in Saint Louis by
J. S. Drake and M. C. Orton, who agreed to build the works and install
the pumps for a specified sum. After the franchise was granted it was
transferred to a company composed of Morgan Jones, E. P. Cowen and Henry
McLaughlin who complied with the terms of the franchise and the works
were constructed. They subsequently sold the works to the city.

On August 17th, 1878, Mr. J. J. Peters made the announcement that
artesian water could be found under Fort Worth. He showed his faith by
his works and proceeded to sink a well in the Southwestern portion of
the city, not far from Sixth and Florence streets. His prediction was
verified by a fine flow of water that spouted many feet above the
surface. He proceeded at once to sink a second well on Peach street,
near Hampton, on the property of John Nichols, which was also a
pronounced success. In fact it was a much stronger flow than that found
in the first well. From that time on there were a number of wells sunk
and almost the entire city depended on the artesian wells for the
domestic supply. The history of the water works system of Fort Worth for
later years is known to all well informed men and need not be elaborated
here.




                            STREET RAILWAYS.


On September 6th, 1876, a franchise was granted to a company composed of
J. P. Smith. K. M. VanZandt, W. A. Huffman, Morgan Jones and Geo. Noble
for a street railway from the court house to the Texas & Pacific depot.
The contract for its construction was let to Morgan Jones and the work
commenced on November 17th. The first car ran over the line on Christmas
day and Mr. Walter A. Huffman officiated as conductor. The cars were
about the size of an ordinary street omnibus and were propelled by one
mule something larger than a west Texas jack rabbit. That the business
was not very profitable is gathered from the report of the first year's
business, which shows that the gross receipts were $22.00 per day,
showing the transportation of 440 persons each day.

In 1882 there was a spurt in street railway construction that is
probably without a parallel. Every one that had any money, and some who
had none, undertook to build a street railway. The two most important
lines were the Queen City Street Railway and the Rosedale Street Railway
with the road to Mistletoe Heights as a good third. The latter was
constructed from Jennings avenue out Thirteenth street to Ballinger,
thence south across the railway to Terrell Avenue, or in that
neighborhood and thence west under the Fort Worth & Rio Grande to the
Heights. These were where Westmoreland Place is now located. Then there
was the Polytechnic Heights Street Railway and another across the river
and way out towards Decatur somewhere. The present Traction Company runs
over these two latter, and it owns all that was found of value of the
Rosedale and Queen City lines. Then there was the "nine-mile belt" that
ran all around over the South Side, crossed the Katy and Santa Fe tracks
on Magnolia Avenue and wandered around through the Seventh ward
somewhere.

Fort Worth was the first city in the United States to have all of its
street railways equipped with electric appliances.




                               GAS WORKS.


On August 31st, 1876, the first gas company was organized with J. P.
Smith as President; John Nichols, Treasurer and J. Q. St. Clair,
Secretary. A franchise was granted the company. On November 26th. a
contract was entered into with John Lockwood, of New Jersey, to
construct the works and lay the mains. Some idea of the extent of the
plant can be gathered from the fact that it was to cost $20,000. The
plant was added to from time to time, as the demand for light increased,
until the entire business section was supplied with gas. The works were
finally sold to a new company of which Mr. H. C. Scott, of St. Louis,
was the principal owner, and it remained under his control until sold to
the Fort Worth Light & Power Co., and it in turn transferred the
property to the present company.




                            PACKING HOUSES.


It would be a harrowing tale to relate all the efforts made to provide a
packing plant for this city. The Fort Worth Democrat, which had earned a
reputation for "seeing things," first made the prediction on April 25th,
1875, that some day Fort Worth would be a large producer of refrigerated
meats for export. It harped on this in season and out of season and
watched for every opportunity to advance the project. The editor,
learning that a man was in Dallas negotiating to establish a plant
there, went to that city and formed his acquaintance. It was learned
that the Dallas people did not regard the project with much favor. The
man, whose name was Richardson only asked that the city make a donation
of six acres of ground for the plant. He was told that if he would come
to Fort Worth that he could select the ground and that a deed would be
delivered to him in an hour. He came and looked over the situation and
selected the lands where the Medlin Mill now stands. Fortunately the
land belonged to John Peter Smith and it was only necessary to tell
Smith what was in the wind and the deed was forthcoming. He erected a
small packing plant on the land now occupied by the Medlin Flouring
Mills. As he only essayed to kill and refrigerate hogs, and as there
were very few hogs in Texas, the plant was shortlived. He soon sold it
and went out about Cisco and put in a plant to make plaster from gypsum.

Shortly after this a man by the name of Higgs came to the city and in a
few days secured capital to erect a refrigerating plant in the southeast
part of the city. He killed a cargo of cattle and sent them to Saint
Louis, but that proved like sending coals to Newcastle and his venture
was doomed to failure. He sold his plant to Mr. Isaac Dahlman of the
firm of Dahlman Bros., the first clothing merchants in the city. He
killed cattle and sent them to Liverpool by way of Galveston, but they
were so long on the way that they did not arrive in good condition. This
ended the third attempt but did not dismay the people of Fort Worth.
They believed that this was to become a packing house center and in 1890
thirty men got together and each agreed to put in one thousand dollars
and purchase some lands and put up more money, share and share alike, as
it was needed. Mr. H. C. Holloway was selected to manage the affairs of
the company and he bought lands where the present plants are situated
and proceeded to build fences and lots and later on a small packing
house. It had a capacity of 250 cattle and 1000 hogs per day. About this
time John R. Hoxie came to Fort Worth from Chicago and as it was thought
he knew all about the industry, he was induced to put in more money, buy
more land and increase the capacity of the yards.

He too made a failure and the plant after a precarious existence was
sold to Messrs. Simpson and Niles of Boston, neither of whom were
practical packers. Mr. Niles was a business man and under his management
with the assistance of Mr. H. A. Judd, still a citizen of Fort Worth,
the plant earned money. The owners recognized the fact that the plant
did not meet the requirements of the times and with the assistance of
some of the public spirited people of the city they enlisted the
interest of Armour and Swift and secured the present establishments.
Most of the thirty men who put the first money into the plant
surrendered their holdings as gifts to make the deal go through.

The corner stone of the new buildings was laid on the 13th day of March,
1902, in the presence of a large concourse of the citizens of the city.
Just a year thereafter the first cattle were killed in the new houses.
At that time Mr. Armour made the prediction that in ten years Fort Worth
would be the second market for cattle in the United States. His
prediction was verified.




                            FIRE DEPARTMENT.


The first attempt to organize a fire company in the city occurred in
April, 1873. A meeting for that purpose was called at the court house by
the Democrat. When the night arrived it brought with it a "blue
norther." There was not sufficient interest in the matter to justify the
people in facing the storm and the only person present was the editor of
the paper. The following is his report of the meeting:

"Pursuant to notice given in the last number of the Democrat, we
proceeded to the court house last Tuesday evening at precisely half past
seven, to meet the citizens in mass meeting, for the purpose of becoming
a member of the Fort Worth Hook and Ladder Company No. 1. We took our
position on the steps of that edifice, and although the stone was a
little cool, we heroically held our position until patience ceased to be
a virtue. Not a soul put in an appearance. Several who had promised
faithfully to be present forgot to keep the appointment.

Determined to carry to a successful completion every project we take in
hand, we went to work to organize the meeting. A chairman is essential
to any meeting. They are necessary to keep the meeting in order, and
give the assemblage proper dignity. We were unanimously chosen chairman
and took our seat amid the most profound silence. But a difficulty,
wholly unexpected now presented itself. A secretary to keep the record
of the proceedings is equally indispensable. There was no one to make
secretary. Not to be thwarted by minor obstacles, we finally with much
reluctance, consented to assume this arduous position also. Some one was
needed to manage the finances and take care of the funds. That being our
forte, we assumed the responsible position of treasurer. We then
appointed ourself a committee of five to draft resolutions. The
resolutions agreeably to an ancient custom at meetings of this kind had
been prepared by a friend. We immediately proceeded to adopt them as a
whole without debate.

We have procured all the machinery necessary for a first class Hook and
Ladder company, viz: a five foot step ladder, a walking stick with a
hook on the end, a pint cup and a wet blanket and are now ready to
extinguish fire in any part of the city on short notice. All orders
promptly executed, day or night.

Dallas can no longer claim to be ahead of Fort Worth. The Herald and
News are complaining because they have no fire brigade. Send your orders
to Fort Worth, neighbor. If you will let us know a day or two before you
intend to have a fire, we will be on hand with our machine.

We are going to give a ba(w)ll pretty soon for the relief of the
sufferers by the first fire. Of course we are going to have a fire or
there would be no necessity for our Hook and Ladder company, and when
there is a fire, of course some one will suffer. Then you will know how
it is yourself, dear people."

A second attempt made about a month later was more successful. A goodly
number answered the call and a company was organized with Capt. S. P.
Greene as President, B. B. Paddock, Secretary and William T. Field as
Foreman. There were about sixty members, mostly clerks and mechanics, on
the roll and they made up a purse and ordered a hook and ladder truck
with all the necessary accoutrements. A series of entertainments were
given to raise the funds at one of which a vote was taken at so much per
vote for the most popular young lady in the city, who should have the
privilege of naming the company. The leading contestants were Miss
Sallie Johnson, daughter of Col. M. T. Johnson and Miss Anna T. Harper,
a sister of Mrs. B. B. Paddock. Miss Johnson was the successful
candidate and the company was named in honor of her father the M. T.
Johnson Hook and Ladder Company. It remained as No. 1 until 1893, when
the paid fire department was organized, when it passed off the stage.
There was never a more enthusiastic and successful band of
fire-fighters.

On October 17th, 1876, when city airs were assumed, an engine company
was organized, of which Capt. M. B. Loyd was president. He was also the
first president of the Fort Worth Fire Department, which was organized
after the second company came into existence, and was the accredited
delegate to the meeting of the State Fire Department. Other companies
followed as the necessity arose and Fort Worth long enjoyed the
reputation of having the finest department in the State. When the city
took over the management of the fire department and put the men on the
payroll, the volunteers were given preference over all applicants and
some of them are in service at this writing. When it became a paid fire
department, Mr. N. H. Lassiter was the President, and the last meeting
was a most affecting occasion. Many of the old "fire-fighters" were
opposed to disbanding the volunteer service and laid down the
responsibility with great reluctance.




                              NEWSPAPERS.


  "'Twere long to tell what steeds gave o'er,
  As swept the hunt through Campus-more."

It would be an almost endless task and one the writer will not essay to
tell the history of the newspapers of this city. It has been the
graveyard of the hopes and aspirations of ambitious men, who without
capital, and oft times without experience, have undertaken the work of
furnishing an unappreciative public with a newspaper in Fort Worth.

It was on March 7th, 1860, that Fort Worth had its first paper. It was
started by a man by the name of Cleveland and was called the Enterprise.
How long it continued, and what became of it the writer has been unable
the ascertain.

The second attempt was made in October, 1871, when Maj. K. M. VanZandt,
John Hanna, W. H. Overton, Capt. Sam Evans and Junius W. Smith bought
from Maj. J. J. Jarvis the press and material of a paper at Quitman in
Wood county and moved here and started the Fort Worth Democrat. In
October, 1872, they sold it to Capt. B. B. Paddock, who assumed
management and direction of the paper on the 1st day of January, 1873.
He continued the publication until June 30th, 1882, when it was merged
with the Live Stock Journal, owned by George B. Loving, and changed to
the Fort Worth Gazette, which during its continuance was confessedly the
best paper ever printed in this State.

On July 4th, 1876, the Democrat started the first daily paper, coming
out as a morning paper on the morning of the Centennial year,
unannounced and unheralded, without a single subscriber or a line of
advertising. The audacity of the enterprise made a favorable impression
on the public-spirited and generous people of the city and they rallied
to its support with enthusiasm. But there was neither room nor patronage
for a daily morning paper in a city of three thousand people and the
patronage, however liberal, would not furnish it with the necessary
nourishment and it was a failure financially from start to finish. It
was a wide awake and enterprising little sheet, advocating with zeal and
enthusiasm every measure that its owner considered for the upbuilding of
the city.

In 1873 the Fort Worth Standard made its bow to the public. It was owned
and managed by Mr. J. K. Millican who is still a resident of the city.
It was followed during the same summer by the Epitomist, established by
Will H. Lawrence, who came from Kansas. The panic of 1873 sent it to the
happy hunting grounds. On its demise the associate editor, L. R. Brown,
better known at that time as "High-toned Brown" leased the material and
started The Post, which lasted about three weeks. The public realized
that there was not room for two papers, much less three, and failed to
accord it any patronage.

The Standard lasted for several years. Soon after the Democrat started
its daily, the Standard essayed the same, publishing an evening paper.
But it could not find the necessary support and finally succumbed to the
inevitable.

The Journal, Mirror, Star, Mail, Tribune, News and many other papers
came and went down in the years that followed with rapid succession. The
experience of one seemed to have no effect on the ambitions of the men
who knew how to run a paper.

In the Spring of 1884 Capt. Paddock sold his interest in the Gazette to
Mr. Loving and retired from active newspaper work, although he was
interested several times in the property in a financial way.

In 1885 the Gazette was purchased by a stock company organized for that
purpose by Maj. VanZandt, Walter Huffman, Morgan Jones, W. G. Turner, W.
L. Malone, B. B. Paddock and others who wanted to have a good morning
paper in the city. The ownership finally passed into the hands of Mr. W.
A. Huffman, who during his lifetime kept it up at great financial
sacrifice and loss. But its high standard never faltered. It was a good
paper published every day in the week. After the lamentable death of Mr.
Huffman, his widow essayed to continue the publication of the paper. It
was still conducted at great financial loss. After the panic of 1893,
Mrs. Huffman realized that she could no longer stand the strain incident
to its publication and she sold the paper to Capt. B. B. Paddock. He had
neither desire nor ambition to continue in the business and was only
actuated by a wish that the paper should not suspend. He proceeded to
organize a stock company to take over the property. He associated Mr. W.
L. Malone, then out of business, Mr. E. G. Senter, who was publishing an
afternoon paper called the Mail, Hon. Barnett Gibbs, Mr. Sawnee
Robinson, Mr. O. B. Colquitt and some others and turned the plant over
to them. It proved not to be a very happy family. With the most
harmonious effort its success was not a certainty; with discord in the
management, it was doomed to disaster. Mr. Paddock transferred his
interest to Mr. Malone in order to give him control, hoping thereby to
bring about a solution of the trouble. Soon thereafter Mr. Malone died
and with his death the paper was doomed. Mr. Senter had associated with
him his cousin Selden Williams, who came from Tennessee, to engage in
the business. They could not make it a success. In the late summer of
1897 they sold the Associated Press franchise and the subscription list
to the Dallas News and suspended publication without a word of warning
to the people of the city. It was the most dastardly piece of disloyalty
to a town ever perpetrated.

For a long time thereafter Fort Worth was without an organ or an
advocate in the way of a daily newspaper. It felt the loss keenly, but
there was no one to step into the breach and assume the responsibility
of the publication of a paper. There had been such a fatality attending
every effort that men hesitated to put their money into another venture.
A man by the name of King finally came along and proposed on certain
conditions to start a morning paper. The people wanted a paper so much
that the conditions were eagerly accepted and Mr. King started the
Herald. It lasted about a month. The promoter pocketed the money that
had been advanced him and hied himself to new and fresher pastures. Thus
the second time the public were betrayed.

When the Gazette was sold to the News it left a large number of men out
of employment. They proceeded to organize a co-operative company and
publish the Register. They got what business they could at whatever
price they could obtain and on Saturday night divided the proceeds among
the working force. Among these interested were A. J. Sandegard, J. A.
McAllister and Clarence Lee who are still among the honored citizens of
the city. The Register grew rapidly in business and favor. The public
applauded the nerve of the promoters and gave it such liberal patronage
that it had money in the bank--the first time such a thing had happened
to a Fort Worth paper. It was finally merged into the Fort Worth Record,
which has also been a paying enterprise.

The history of the Star-Telegram, another successful newspaper venture
is too recent and too well known to require extended notice in this
paper.




                                HOTELS.


The advent of the railroad created a demand for increased hotel
facilities and the public-spirited citizens proceeded to supply the
demand. On December 1st, 1876, a company was organized with a capital of
$30,000 of which Capt. J. C. Terrell was elected President; W. J. Boaz,
Vice-President; J. Q. Sandidge, Treasurer and C. K. Fairfax, Secretary.
K. M. VanZandt, W. A. Huffman, W. W. Dunn, J. C. Terrell, J. Q.
Sandidge, B. C. Evans, J. E. Streeper, C. K. Fairfax and W. J. Boaz
constituted the Board of Directors. It was christened the El Paso Hotel
and was opened for business on the 22d day of September, 1877, with
seventy-six rooms. It was leased to C. K. Fairfax & Co., who furnished
it at a cost of approximately $15,000. It was located where the present
Westbrook now stands. Major VanZandt and his family may not like to have
it told that he was subjected to no little criticism at the time by some
of the people for his action in this connection, but the truth of
history requires that personal feelings must not stand in the way of
telling the truth about such matters. Major VanZandt owned the land on
which it was desired to erect the building and it was asserted that
knowing this to be the logical place for the hotel, that he held the
company up for an exorbitant price. He put the half block at the
fabulous sum of three thousand dollars, payable in stock of the company.
It would be interesting to know what the "kickers" if any of them are
alive now think of the objections. The Major finally got forty cents on
the dollar for his stock which made the price of the half block $1200.
The property was finally sold to M. C. Hurley, but the price paid is not
available at this writing.

Other hostelries at that time were the Mansion, Clark House, Commercial
Hotel and other less pretentious houses, every one of which was "the
best in the city."




                              STAGE LINES.


Prior to 1880, all the passenger business and transportation of the
mails for the entire country west of Fort Worth was conducted by stage
lines, which radiated from the city as the railroads do now.

The first line of importance and one that attracted the attention of the
entire country was the Fort Worth and Fort Concho stage line which ran a
daily line from this city to Fort Concho which stood where San Angelo is
now located. This was what was known in postoffice parlance as "star
route" service.

In 1877 a contract was let by the Post Office Department for a daily
line from Fort Worth to Fort Yuma, Arizona, a distance of 1560 miles,
the longest stage line in the world. Fort Worth shouted itself hoarse
when the announcement was made and a banquet was given the manager of
the line, Mr. J. T. Chidester. Bob McCart who had but recently come to
the city from Bloomington, Illinois, was the principal speaker on the
occasion and one who heard his speech must have been impressed with the
fact that this was the greatest commercial enterprise in all history, up
to that time. The stages were run through to Yuma in seventeen days. But
this was found to be too long. The coyotes and horned frogs that
inhabited most of the country beyond the Concho could not afford to wait
that long for their mail and so the Second Assistant Postmaster General,
at the earnest solicitation of the inhabitants, and the contractors,
agreed to increase the compensation one hundred per cent. if the trip
could be made in thirteen days--which was easy. It was one of the
matters for Congressional investigation of the "Star Route Steal" but
they never found Chidester. The mail left Fort Worth in a concord coach
pulled by six horses and ran to Tharp Springs, where it was transferred
to a surrey with two horses. These went as far as Brownwood, where a
buckboard and two bronchos took it the remainder of the way, if they
were not interrupted.




                              THE COURTS.


At that time the Judicial District in which Tarrant county was a part
included the counties of Denton, Parker, Wise and Dallas. Hon. Hardin
Hart was District Judge. He was an appointee of Edward J. Davis and was
not very popular with the bar or the people. He was about as rough a
specimen of the genus homo as ever graced the bench. His habits were
said not to be very exemplary and this contributed to his unpopularity.
He was accustomed to use the vernacular of the bar-room and the poker
game. At one time J. C. Terrell proposed to amend his pleadings and the
Judge responded, "Now, Joe, you know you can't raise at this stage of
the game. Gause stands pat on his general denial and you will have to
call or lay down your hand."

He did not hold in very high regard the rules of the Higher Courts or
their decisions. On one occasion when James H. Field was arguing a case,
the Judge interrupted him and proceeded to render an adverse decision.
Field, opening a law book said, "If your Honor please, the Supreme Court
says"; Field was not permitted to tell the bench what the Supreme Court
said. Interrupting him, the Judge announced, "Well, let the Supreme
Court say it agin, if it wants to." It was stated that his rulings were
usually correct, notwithstanding his manner of delivering them.

At the March term, 1873, of the District Court, C. C. Cummings, B. B.
Paddock and Mr. Albritton were admitted to the bar. The latter was
easily the brightest and best of these, but he could not stand the
pressure of the hard times that soon set in and left the city, going to
San Diego. Cummings and Paddock are the only surviving members of the
bar at that time. Major J. J. Jarvis is a close second, he having come
to this city in April and formed a partnership with John Peter Smith.




                            POSTAL MATTERS.


The Postoffice was conducted by Rev. J. A. Clark in the early part of
the year, but he resigned and P. J. Bowdry was, after a spirited
contest, appointed to succeed him. Mr. Clark kept what there was of the
postoffice in the drug store of W. T. Ferguson. There was but little
order and decorum in its management, as the postmaster was anxious to be
relieved of his duties. It was not uncommon for the people to go behind
the counter and help themselves to their mail. Bowdry held the office
until July, 1874, when President Grant removed him to make a place for
Col. A. G. Malloy, of Tyler, who was of the same political faith. Malloy
held the office but a short time. In November he was appointed Collector
of Customs at Jefferson and he left at once. Bowdry, who had been his
deputy, was left in charge of the office. An effort was made to have L.
M. Barkley, the present Postmaster, appointed. His father, J. A.
Barkley, constituted the Republican party of Tarrant county at that
time, but his pull at Washington was not sufficient to secure the
appointment for his son and J. P. Alexander was appointed. He raised a
howl of protest at the very outset by moving the office to the corner of
Main and Third streets which was at that time "way out in the country."




                                 BANKS.


The first bank opened in Fort Worth was the banking house of Tidball &
Wilson. Tidball came to the city early in January, 1873, from St.
Charles, Missouri. Associated with him was John F. Wilson, of Virginia.
Wilson furnished the money and Tidball the experience. George B.
Hendricks was the sole employe of the bank. Tidball and he constituted
the entire force. In August, 1874, Maj. K. M. VanZandt, J. P. Smith and
J. J. Jarvis bought the interest of Wilson and put in some more money
and the firm became Tidball, VanZandt & Co. and so remained until 1877,
when it was merged into the Fort Worth National Bank. The second bank
was that of Loyd, Marklee & Co., consisting of M. B. Loyd, Jer. Marklee
and John Nichols. This continued but a few months when Loyd sold his
interest to W. J. Boaz and the bank became Boaz, Marklee & Co., which
was in turn succeeded by the City National Bank. In the summer of 1873,
the bank of G. VanWinkle & Co. was opened. It was composed of G.
VanWinkle and A. P. Wroten. It was short lived. The panic of 1873 closed
its doors. After disposing of his interest in the bank of Loyd, Marklee
& Co. Capt. Loyd proceeded to the organization of the First National
Bank, of which he was made President and so continued until his death in
April, 1912. D. C. Bennett was the First Vice-President and C. H.
Higbee, Cashier. Of the directors Zane-Cetti and S. B. Burnett remain at
this writing.

The situation remained unchanged until the year 1882, when Capt. H. C.
Edrington came to Fort Worth from Bryan and established the Traders
National Bank, of which he was President and W. J. Boaz, Vices-President
and George Mulkey, Cashier.

In October, 1876, McCrary & Barlow opened a private bank. The firm
consisted of John E. Barlow and Nelson McCrary. Barlow has been dead
many years but McCrary still live a worthy citizen of this city.




                          TEXAS SPRING PALACE.


This unique and attractive place of amusement came at a date within the
memory of thousands now living, but it was such an unusual and beautiful
edifice that a few lines in regard to it may not be inappropriate.

It was erected in the Winter and Spring of 1888-9, and was located on
the Texas & Pacific reservation north of and opposite the intersection
of Railroad and Galveston avenues.

At that time Toronto, Canada, and Saint Paul, Minn. were having Ice
Palaces and Sioux City, Iowa, its Corn Palace. General R. A. Cameron who
was the Colonization and Immigration Agent of the Fort Worth & Denver,
conceived the idea of having such an exhibition of the products of the
Field, Forest, Orchard and Garden at Fort Worth and having it in the
spring when there were no other places of entertainment and amusement
anywhere in the country.

A company was soon organized with a capital of $50,000 of which $38,000
was subscribed when the company commenced business. B. B. Paddock was
made President, W. A. Huffman, Treasurer and Willis H. Post, Secretary.
W. F. Sommerville was made Director General and Gen. Cameron his
assistant.

The contract for the building which was in the shape of a Saint Andrew's
cross and was 225x375 feet in dimensions was let to Thos. J. Hurley and
his associates, who were then in the business of constructing buildings.
E. D. Allen, of Chicago, was employed to superintend the decorations.
There was not an inch of timber in the structure, except the floors, but
that was covered with some product of Texas, wrought in the most
artistic manner into pictures. It was easily the most beautiful
structure ever erected on earth. It was opened May 10th, 1889, with
impressive ceremonies and everybody in town was present. Governor
Thurston, of Nebraska, made the opening address and the music was
furnished by the band of the Elgin Watch Factory, of Elgin, Illinois.
The National Band of Mexico and other bands from different sections of
the country were in attendance during the season.

No expense or pains were spared in advertising the Palace in all parts
of the country. Special committees, travelling in "special cars" were
sent to Washington and to the City of Mexico to present invitations to
Presidents Harrison and Diaz of the two Republics to attend the Spring
Palace. These invitations were the limit of the engraver's art and were
handsomely bound in silver. This is but a sample of the extravagant
management that attended the work from start to finish. The result was,
that notwithstanding the generous patronage of the home people and the
public when the gates were closed on the 10th day of June, there was a
deficit of over $23,000. It took President Paddock and the Directors
about an hour to raise the money and pay off the bills of the company.

In January, 1900, the Directors for the second year opened subscription
lists for the money for the second year. It was soon subscribed and the
work inaugurated for the second year. More economical plans were adopted
and more system observed in the expenditure of funds. One hundred feet
were added to the east and west wings of the building and the
decorations were as elaborate and beautiful as for the first year. One
hundred of the patriotic women of the city were organized into groups of
ten each and they worked eight and ten hours a day for over one hundred
days in decorating the building. Such another example of patriotic
purpose was never before seen in any community.

The building when completed was as beautiful and more elaborate than the
first. Cities and counties from all over the State were assigned space
in the building and prizes offered for the most attractive decoration.
This enlisted the interest of many towns and counties and the result was
very gratifying.

The attendance for the second year exceeded that of the first, as the
beauty and attractiveness as well as the utility of the exhibit had been
heralded over the State and adjoining States. The season was most
profitable and successful from every standpoint.

The last night but one was dedicated to a grand fancy dress ball to be
held on the ground floor of the building which had a space for dancing
of approximately 16,000 square feet. A most extensive ball room. Special
trains were run from near-by cities and towns; that from Dallas bringing
over one thousand people in their best "bib and tucker." But they were
destined not to enjoy the occasion. Just as the floor had been cleared
and the visitors were entering the gates the cry of "Fire! Fire!!
Fire!!!" rang through the building, carrying terror to every inmate of
the vast structure. How the fire originated was never determined. It
started on the north side, about the center of the Main Building, and in
less time than it takes to write these lines, the entire structure was a
mass of flames, inside and out. It was estimated that there were 7000
people in the building and why hundreds did not perish is a mystery. The
officials of the company, who were present, directed the visitors to the
various exits, of which there were sixteen, and no Sunday school in the
country was ever dismissed with more decorum and good order. Every
person accepted the direction of those in charge as if they were on
dress parade on a military plaza. In four minutes the building was a
mass of flame, inside and out, and in eleven minutes the building fell
to the ground. So rapid was the spread of the fire, that the firemen,
who were stationed in different parts of the building with their hose
connected to the fire hydrants, did not have time to turn on the water.

That the loss of life was not appalling is one of the wonders of the
occasion. About thirty people were injured, more or less seriously, and
many were burned. Low necked and short sleeved dresses of the ladies
exposed them to the falling cinders and pieces from the decorations
which were of the lightest and most inflammable character.

One life only was sacrificed, that of Al Haynes, a civil engineer, who
was one of the most active and efficient in directing the moving throngs
to the various exits and rendering assistance to the people. He seemed
to be as cool and collected as any person in the building. But he seemed
to have lost self-control at the last minute and ran and jumped through
a window to the ground below, a distance of seventeen feet. The fall
broke both ankles and prevented him from getting away from the fire
which was raging over that part of the exterior. Some gallant men took
the "fly" from a tent that stood in the garden and holding it before
them rushed up and threw it over Haynes and then dragged him away from
the building. The most conspicuous man in this was a workman, named
Mahoney, who was badly burned. Haynes was removed to the hospital and
received the best medical treatment that could be obtained, but he
succumbed to the injuries received, the following day.

The ladies of the city, under the leadership of Mrs. Drew Pruitt, now of
Los Angeles, solicited the funds and erected the monument to his memory
that now stands in the triangle at the foot of Main and Houston streets.

The Spring Palace, which was a credit to the public spirit of the people
of Fort Worth, went out in a blaze of glory.




                            TELEGRAPH LINES.


The first telegraph line was built into Fort Worth in the summer of
1876. It was owned and operated by C. L. Frost and Max Elser. After the
advent of the Railroad it was sold to the Western Union. In 1886 the
Baltimore & Ohio Telegraph Company built into the city, but it soon sold
to the Western Union.




                            FLOURING MILLS.


The first flouring mill for commercial purposes was built by Messrs.
Wolcott & Blandin. Work commenced on November 28th, 1874, and the first
flour was ground June 26th, 1875. Later Joseph H. Brown bought an
interest in the mill and secured the expert services of James W. Swayne
as manager. Swayne, who was called "Jim" by his friends, was educated
for the law and of course knew all about the manufacture and sale of
flour. The second mill was built by Mr. M. P. Bewley, whose worthy son,
E. E. Bewley is at this writing the manager of the Medlin Mills.




                           REGISTERED CATTLE.


The first registered cattle were brought to Texas from London, Ohio, by
James A. Brock, then of Fort Griffin, now of El Paso. It was thought at
that time to be a foolish venture, but time and experience has
demonstrated his wisdom.




                             LUMBER YARDS.


Following the completion of the railroad to Fort Worth came lumber yards
and lumber dealers from all over East Texas. All that section of the
city bounded by Houston street, Monroe street, on the east and west and
by Ninth street on the north and as far south as the railroad
reservation, was one vast lumber yard; and the entire country west,
southwest and northwest of Fort Worth was supplied with building
material from this city. Hundreds of wagons were loaded daily and the
roads out of Fort Worth were lined with wagons transporting it to as far
west as San Angelo and even beyond. It was the nearest market for all
the western country for several years and brought millions of dollars to
the city.

The first cotton compress was erected by Col. E. W. Morton, about the
foot of Commerce street. The first bale of cotton was compressed on the
17th day of September, 1877, with appropriate ceremonies. On September
2d, 1878, a second compress was erected.

The first grain elevator was erected by Mark Evans about where the
present depot of the Fort Worth & Denver road now stands.

The first ice factory was built by R. E. Maddox, W. H. Little and Dr. N.
Wallerich, they having acquired the plant of the first refrigerator and
converted it into an ice factory.




                           EFFORTS AT UPLIFT.


The reformer was here then as now and tried to reform every one else but
himself, just as they do now and with about the same success. The town
was "wide open" to the horror of some and an effort was made at
intervals to put a stop to the open gambling house. One Grand Jury
falling under the influence of the "up-lifters" brought out indictments
against about thirty members of a whist club that played whist in the
rear of a saloon owned and managed by Henry Byrne. (His widow, Maggie,
lives here still.) The club was composed of the business men of the
city; not one of whom ever entered the wide open gambling houses. Having
no business, they played whist. The stakes were a bottle of beer--if any
one wanted the beer. A dozen or more indictments were found against each
member. The District Attorney was a Dallas lawyer. The fee in each case
was ten dollars. A pretty good sum for one term of Court. The juries
were compelled to find verdicts of guilty and assessed the fine at from
1/37 of a cent up to one cent. But it carried the costs. The county paid
many hundreds of dollars for the fun and the district attorney gathered
many thousands. He was not a candidate for re-election.




                          OH! THE FUN WE HAD.


There was lots of fun in those days. No one had much to do but to enjoy
life and boost Fort Worth. They did both to the extreme limit. A man
could and did wear the same suit of clothes year after year and no one
commented on his frugality or poverty. Women wore the same dresses to
church, Sunday after Sunday, and no one was found to criticise. The
girls, and there were pretty girls then as now, not so plentiful, only
because there were not so many girls, wore the same dresses (that was
before they commenced wearing "gowns" in the daytime) to all society
gatherings without apology or explanation.

They did not find it necessary to cut their dresses for high water or
low in the neck in order to display their physical charms. There were
dances in the court room, in a hall over a livery stable and at private
residences, occasionally. They danced the cotillion, lancers, Virginia
reel. The tango, bunny hug, turkey trot and other fancy stunts were
unknown.

There were picnics on the Clear Fork in the daytime and by moonlight,
when the moon was in commission. Everybody was happy and tried to make
his neighbor happy. Good old days.

The practical joker had plenty of time in which to indulge in his fun.
One of the best of these was on General Peers, who kept the Commercial
Hotel, at the corner of Fifth and Commerce streets. As usual, every one
was on the qui vive for railroad news. One day John S. Hirshfield had a
spurious telegram delivered to the General, purporting to be from the
private secretary of Jay Gould, the then president of the Texas &
Pacific, announcing that Mr. Gould and a party of capitalists would
arrive on the stage that afternoon and asking that provision be made for
their entertainment. It was signed by "Tom Collins," at that day the
cognomen for all imaginary and fictitious persons. But the General did
not know this and proceeded to buy up all the turkeys in the market and
all the other delicacies to be had. He was instigated to invite about
fifty of the more prominent citizens to dine with Mr. Gould. The plan
was for each of the invited guests to pay for his dinner so that the
hotel would suffer no loss. Along in the afternoon, Charles Fallbush,
who traveled for the wholesale liquor house of Day & Co. came in from a
western trip, dusty and travel stained and was introduced to General
Peers, as Tom Collins, the Secretary of Mr. Gould. Fallbush explained
that he had driven over from Dallas ahead of the party to see that all
arrangements were made for the entertainment of his chief. The scheme
was working beautifully until "Tuck" Boaz, not being advised that the
invited guests were to pay for the dinner and not wishing the General to
suffer such a loss gave the game away.

The "tender-foot" was an easy mark for the practical joker and many of
the "tales that were told" about the condition of affairs in Texas were
the result of the jests played on men unused to the customs of Texas. On
one occasion a man by the name of Robinson, who traveled for the Hall
Safe and Lock Co., badgered his friends about being afraid of Indians.
At that time there was not an Indian in Texas, but, of course, he did
not know that. He was persuaded by some of the traveling men who then
made the western territory to accompany him on a trip out west. The man
consented and went as far as Comanche. They laid over there on Sunday
and the stranger was regaled all the day with stories of the
hair-breadth escapes that members of the party at the hotel had made in
the recent past. The "tender-foot" was not afraid of Indians. About the
middle of the afternoon the party dissolved, one at a time until only
the stranger and the drummer he was with were left in the hotel. Then a
suggestion was made that they two take a walk up the banks of Indian
Creek, which runs by the town. He was glad to go. Was not afraid of
Indians. Oh no. About half a mile from town those who had gone ahead
suddenly rushed out of the mesquite firing their pistols and yelling
like mad. The stranger was told to run for his life--and he did. His
companion soon fell to the ground calling on him to run. He ran into
town and under the hotel. The Democrat published a column or two about
the event and sold Robinson one hundred and fifty copies at ten cents
per. He mailed them to every one of his acquaintance east of the
Mississippi and was a hero, until the next issue told the truth about
the event. He did not order any extra copies of that issue.

These are sample bricks of what was going on most of the time, and will
suffice to indicate that life was not a burden to those who were waiting
for something to turn up, and who knew how to enjoy their enforced
idleness.




                         STEALING AN EXCURSION.


One of the most amusing incidents of the time occurred in the Spring of
1875. A man by the name of George W. Cole from somewhere up in
Pennsylvania had plotted a townsite out in Palo Pinto County which he
called Lamar. He alleged in his advertisements that it would be a
division point on the Texas & Pacific. He sold a good many lots to the
"sucker" element that is always ready to grab at any thing that sounds
cheap. He went over to Tennessee and worked up an excursion to come and
see Texas. It was farthest from his thought to show them Lamar. He only
intended to let them see what a good country Texas was. Hearing about
the excursion, the Democrat got out an extra edition, telling about
Tarrant county in general and Fort Worth in particular. The editor took
a bundle of the papers and went to Texarkana to meet the excursion
train. It took breakfast at that place and while the excursionists were
enjoying their mututinal meal, the papers were distributed in every seat
in the train. After they had time to look the paper over, the editor
went through the train and made their acquaintance. He so ingratiated
himself with them that by the time the train reached Dallas, they were
nearly all ready to come on to Fort Worth, to which place he promised
them free transportation. That night he preempted every seat in the
stage coaches and engaged hacks for the rest of the party. They spent
the night at the Crutchfield Hotel and in the morning were to have had a
reception by the business men. General W. L. Cabell was the mayor of the
town. When the hour for the reception arrived there was no one to
receive. They had gone to Fort Worth, where they had a royal good time.
Later some of them settled in Tarrant County. Mayor Cabell said he had
heard of thefts of every kind but that it was the first time he ever
heard of any one stealing an excursion.




                    NEITHER COMPLETE NOR INFALLIBLE.


There is no pretense that these pages are a complete history of the
early days of the city. There are many things, and some of them of
importance and interest that have not been mentioned. Many persons of
note who have contributed to the growth of the city are not enumerated
herein. This is because the memory is faulty and not with a wish to
withhold credit from any. Such as it is, it will serve to refresh the
memory of some and be of interest to others who are not familiar with
the struggles through which Fort Worth went and from which it emerged
with success.




                          Transcriber's Notes


--Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

--Corrected a few palpable typos.

--In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of Project Gutenberg's Early Days in Fort Worth, by B. B. Paddock

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EARLY DAYS IN FORT WORTH ***

***** This file should be named 57801.txt or 57801.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/8/0/57801/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

