The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Rosary, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Rosary

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: October 30, 2018 [EBook #58213]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROSARY ***




Produced by Michael Gray, Archdiocese of Portland in Oregon




The Rosary


NIHIL OBSTAT
ARTHURIUS L. McMAHON, O.P., S.T.M
Prior Provincialis

IMPRIMATUR
+EDUARDUS J. HANNA
Archepiscopus S. Francisci

S. Francisci, die 27 Sept. 1915



THE ROSARY

---

THE name Rosary signifies a crown of roses; and well does this
devotion deserve, by just right, a name so beautiful. The rose
is the most beautiful of flowers and ravishes our senses with
its beauty and perfume; and there is no delight that can equal
the heavenly enchantment of the spiritual sweetness which is
exhaled from this beautiful prayer.

The Rosary is a spiritual garland of mystic roses with which we
deck the brow of Mary--a diadem which reflects the joy and
brilliance, the purity and fecundity of the glorious _Queen of
Heaven_.

The flowers which we weave are not of this earth, but are
indigenous to Paradise, and were transplanted by an angel's hand
from their native soil to bloom and flourish among the weeds and
thistles of this miserable and sinful world.

There is no form of prayer more efficacious, or more excellent
and acceptable before Heaven than Mary's own devotion, the
Rosary. There is nothing that the great Holy Father, Pope Leo
XIII, urged more upon the Church than the devout practice of
reciting the beads in her honor.

The devotion of the Holy Rosary was revealed to St. Dominic by
the Blessed Virgin Mary, who commanded him to preach it
throughout the world; and hence the Rosary has ever been the
spiritual heritage and distinct property of the Dominican Order.

The Rosary is adapted to the learned and the ignorant, and to
every capacity. The form and matter are intelligible to the most
illiterate, and yet so sublime as to be matter of contemplation
worthy of the highest intellect. Moreover, the Rosary is not
only a most sublime and perfect devotion, but there is no
devotion in the Church which is enriched with more precious and
valuable helps to salvation; and there is nothing, outside the
Holy Sacrifice, that can profit the living and the dead equal to
the pious recitation of the Rosary.


The Form and Matter of the Rosary

The Rosary consists in the recitation, in honor of the Most Holy
Virgin Mary, Mother of God, of the Angelic Salutation one
hundred and fifty times, distributed into fifteen decades; each
decade being preceded by the Lord's Prayer and accompanied by
meditation on one of the principal mysteries of our Divine
Saviour and terminated by the doxology or "Glory be to the
Father," etc. The vocal prayer is the matter, the _body_ of this
exercise; the meditation on the fifteen mysteries is the form,
and, as it were, the _soul_ of this prayer. The Rosary is
divided into three parts; each part contains five mysteries and
is called a chaplet. The first part consists of the five joyful
mysteries; the second, of the five sorrowful; and the third, of
the five glorious mysteries.


Manner of Reciting the Rosary

The method of reciting the Rosary practiced by the Dominicans is
as follows:

In the name of the Father, etc.

V. Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee.

R. Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy
womb--Jesus.

V. Thou, O Lord, wilt open my lips.

R. And my tongue shall announce Thy praise.

V. Incline unto my aid, O God.

R. O Lord, make haste to help me.

Glory be to the Father, etc., Alleluia.

(From Septuagesima to Easter, instead of Alleluia, say Praise by
to Thee, O Lord, King of eternal glory.)

Then announce either "the first part of the holy Rosary, the
five joyful mysteries," or "the second part of the holy Rosary,
the five sorrowful mysteries," or "the third part of the holy
Rosary, the five glorious mysteries." Then the first mystery,
"The Annunciation," etc., and Our Father once, Hail Mary ten
times, Glory be to the Father once; in the meantime, meditating
on the mystery. After reciting five decades, the Hail, Holy
Queen is said, followed by

V. Queen of the most holy Rosary, pray for us.

R. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.

Let Us Pray

O God, whose only begotten Son, by His life, death and
resurrection, has purchased for us the rewards of eternal life,
grant, we beseech Thee, that, meditating upon these mysteries of
the most holy Rosary of the Blessed Virgin Mary, we may imitate
what they contain and obtain what they promise. Through the same
Christ our Lord. Amen.



The Five Joyful Mysteries

(Assigned for Mondays and Thursdays throughout the year, the
Sundays in Advent and after Epiphany till Lent.)

Like scenes of some wondrous drama these Mysteries set before us
the joys of the life of our Saviour. One by one the scenes are
unfolded--each telling its story, conveying its Gospel lesson to
the human soul. Before our mental view pass the personages
mentioned in God's Book. Here are Mary the humble, Joseph the
obedient, Elizabeth the prayerful, Simeon the just, the angels
on earth and in heaven--all bending in lowly reverence before
Jesus, the grand central figure of the Rosary devotion. Our
minds filled with Faith and Hope and Love, we begin the decades:


First Joyful Mystery:

"The Annunciation"

"And the angel being come in, said unto her: Hail, full of
grace, the Lord is with thee; blessed art thou among women. Who
having heard, was troubled at his saying, . . . And the angel
said to her: Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found grace with God.
Behold thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and shalt bring forth a
son; and thou shalt call His name Jesus."--(St. Luke, I, 28-31)

Mary's Humility

As Jesus, the Savior of Mankind, humbled himself, becoming
obedient even unto the death of the Cross, how fitting that
Mary, his Mother, should in the moment of her greatest
exaltation teach us the lesson of Humility.

Pride wrought the ruin of legions of angels; through pride our
first parents sinned in the Garden of Happiness. By humility our
salvation was achieved--the humility of the Word of God. In our
pride we have disobeyed God's holy law. Through humble penance
are we to regain God's favor.

O Mary, humble hand-maid of the Lord, pray that we know our own
unworthiness!


Second Joyful Mystery:

"The Visitation"

"And Mary rising up in those days, went into the hill country
with haste into a city of Judea. And she entered into the house
of Zachary and saluted Elizabeth. And it came to pass, that when
Elizabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the infant leaped in her
womb."--(St. Luke, I, 39-41.)

Brotherly Love

Charity prompts Mary to visit her cousin Elizabeth in the hour
of her need. Ah, how the loving heart of our dear Mother
anticipates the words of her Divine Son: "By this shall all men
know that you are My disciples, that you have love one for
another."

"I was sick and in prison and you did visit Me," says our
Saviour. And He calls those specially blessed of His Father who
shall feed the hungry, clothe the naked, and bring comfort to
those that mourn. Wheresoever we move on earth let us, by kindly
word and sympathetic action, bring a warm breath of heavenly
charity.

O Mary, sweet Mother of charity, teach us to be kind; and for
the sake of Christ to lighten the burden of Christ's least
brethren!


Third Joyful Mystery:

"The Nativity"

"And she brought forth her first-born Son, and wrapped Him in
swaddling clothes, and laid Him in a manger; because there was
no room for them in the inn."--(St. Luke, II, 7.)

Poverty

"Wrapped in swaddling clothes and laid in a manger" is Jesus on
the night of His birth. The world had forgotten the richness of
being poor. It was needful that Jesus should enter into the
world in poverty to teach the lesson of detachment from earthly
things. In the Crib of Bethlehem, as from the Mount, Christ
teaches the self-same lesson: "Blessed are the poor in spirit,
for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven."

If we possess worldly goods, let us act as God's faithful
stewards, giving liberally to the poor of Christ; if poverty be
our lot, let us not murmur against God's Holy will, but rather
thank God we are saved from the many temptations of riches.

Mary, lover of poverty, teach us to seek first the Kingdom of
God.


Fourth Joyful Mystery:

"The Presentation"

"And after the days of her purification, according to the law of
Moses, were accomplished, they carried Him to Jerusalem, to
present Him to the Lord. As it is written in the law of the
Lord: Every male opening the womb shall be called holy to the
Lord."--(St. Luke, II, 22, 23.)

Purity

In obedience to the Mosaic law, to which He was not subject,
Christ allowed Himself to be presented body and soul in the
Temple to teach us that by purity of body and soul we are to
consecrate ourselves to the service of God.

"Blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see God." As we
are pure of heart, so will our vision of the things of God be
clear. By prayer and the Sacraments shall we maintain purity of
life. Prayer will keep our minds in touch with God. Strict
examination of conscience will make known to us our faults. The
Sacrament of Penance will cleanse our souls. If through the
Sacrament of the Eucharist we abide in Christ, Christ will abide
in us and keep us pure.

O Mary, Virgin Mother, protect us in body and soul!


Fifth Joyful Mystery:

"The Finding in the Temple"

"And it came to pass, that, after three days, they found Him in
the temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, hearing them
and asking them questions. . . . And His mother said to Him:
Son, why hast thou done so to us? behold Thy father and I have
sought Thee sorrowing. And He said to them: How is it that you
sought me? Did you not know that I must be about my Father's
business?"--(St. Luke, II, 46, 48, 49.)

Zeal for Souls

Zeal to be about the things that are His Father's prompts Jesus
to remain in the pulpit in the midst of the doctors of the law,
hearing them and asking them questions. "They that instruct many
to justice shall shine as stars for all eternity." (Daniel XII,
3.) How glorious the reward of those who sacrifice themselves
for the salvation of souls!

Whatsoever be our station in life, we can work for God by word
and example. If our words are holy and of good repute, and our
actions are prompted by charity, justice and purity, we are
spreading the Gospel of Christ--carrying His message to them
that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death.

O Mary, zealous lover of souls, teach us to work for God!



The Five Sorrowful Mysteries

(For Tuesdays and Fridays throughout the year, and the Sundays
in Lent)

The curtain has fallen on the Joyful Mysteries to rise slowly
again, disclosing the principal scene in the Tragedy of Christ.
There is this difference between every other tragedy played out
on the wide stage of the earth and the Tragedy of Christ, that
each one of us acted a sad part in making our Divine Saviour
suffer. When sorrow for our sins brings tears of humble
repentance to our eyes, let us still look up to the Cross--the
Symbol of Hope. "And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will
draw all things to myself." (St. John, XII, 32.) Saints have
meditated on the sufferings of Christ and have found therein the
motive for further battling against temptation; sinners have
contemplated the Sorrowing Christ and have experienced the
undying truth of His words: "Come to Me all you that labor and
are burdened, and I will refresh you." (St. Matt. II, 28.)


First Sorrowful Mystery:

"The Agony in the Garden"

"Then Jesus came with them into a country place which is called
Gethsemane; and He said to His disciples: Sit you here, till I
go yonder and pray . . . And going a little further, He fell
upon His face, praying, and saying: My Father, if it be
possible, let this chalice pass from me. Nevertheless, not as I
will, but as Thou wilt."--(St. Matt., XXVI, 36-39.)

Confidence in Prayer

In agony Christ prayed: "Father, all things are possible to
thee; remove this chalice from me; but not what I will, but what
thou wilt." (St. Luke, XIV, 36.) Three times He sent up the
self-same cry to His Eternal Father, with earnestness and in
resignation to the Will of His Father.

Our Saviour, who had a right to be heard because of His
reverence, was constant and humble in prayer, whilst we who have
so frequently rebelled against God's will pray with distraction
and coldness.

O Mary, for whom thy Son didst work a miracle in answer to
prayer, pray for us and teach us how to pray earnestly and
humbly!


Second Sorrow Mystery:

"The Scourging at the Pillar"

"But the chief priests and ancients persuaded the people, that
they should ask Barabbas, and make Jesus away. And the governor
answering, said to them: Whether will you of the two to be
released unto you? But they said, Barabbas. . . . Then he
released to them Barabbas, and having scourged Jesus, delivered
Him unto them to be crucified."--(St. Matt., XXVII, 20, 21, 26.)

Hatred of Pleasure

To a world gone mad in the pursuit of pleasure, Christ from the
pillar seems to say: "Learn of Me." Standing quivering under the
cruel lashes, what a lesson of mortification Christ teaches! Is
not every gaping wound in His Sacred Body a rebuke to us who
seek to indulge ourselves at all costs--even the cost of our
eternal salvation. As we watch the scourging of our Saviour let
us bemoan our sins, especially our sins of sensuality.

O Mary, Mother of Sorrows, preach to us anew the sermon of St.
Paul, who chastised his body and brought it under subjection.
"Know you not that your members are the temple of the Holy Ghost
who is in you, whom you have from God; and you are not your own?
For you are bought with a great price. Glorify and bear God in
your body." (I Cor. VI, 19.)


Third Sorrowful Mystery:

"The Crowning With Thorns"

"Then the soldiers of the governor taking Jesus into the hall,
gathered together unto Him the whole band; and stripping Him,
they put a scarlet cloak about Him. And platting a crown of
thorns, they put it upon His head, and a reed in His right hand.
And bowing the knee before Him, they mocked Him, saying: Hail,
king of the Jews."--(St. Matt., XXVII, 27-29.)

Humble Faith

"Amen I say to you, unless you be converted, and become as
little children, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven." (St. Matt. XVIII, 2, 3.) How many times through life
has Christ taught the lesson of unquestioning faith! He endures
the cruel Crowning of Thorns that we may learn to be humble of
intellect. Our earth-bound minds can not measure the things of
God, nor solve His mysteries.

With simple faith let us accept the truths God has been pleased
to reveal of Himself, praying: "I do believe, Lord: Help my
unbelief." (St. Mark IX, 23.)

O Mary, pray that our faith may be enlivened!


Fourth Sorrowful Mystery:

"The Carrying of the Cross"

"And they took Jesus, and led Him forth. And bearing His own
cross, He went forth to that place which is called Calvary, but
in Hebrew Golgotha."--(St. Sohn XIX, 16, 17.)

"And as they led Him away, they laid hold of one Simon of
Cyrene, coming from the country; and they laid the cross on him
to carry after Jesus."--(St. Luke, XXIII, 26.)

Patience under Trials

"If any man will follow me, let him deny himself, and take up
his Cross and follow me. For whosoever will save his life shall
lose it; and whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the
gospel, shall save it." (St. Mark VIII, 34.) True discipleship
of Christ is shown by the patience with which we endure our
trials. Mark the life of Christ! In sorrow He entered into this
world; in sorrow He lived; enduring an agony of sorrow He died.

We wish to follow in His footsteps. Let us accept our trials in
humility. We have deserved them for our sins.

O Mary, Mother of Sorrows, teach us to bear the Cross with
patience!


Fifth Sorrowful Mystery:

"The Crucifixion"

"And they came to the place that is called Golgotha, which is
the place of Calvary. . . . And after they had crucified Him
they divided His garments, casting lots; that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying: They divided
My garments among them; and upon My vesture they cast lots. And
they put over His head His cause written: This is Jesus the King
of the Jews."--(St. Matt., XXVII, 33, 35, 37.)

Love of the Cross

"I have a baptism wherewith I am to be baptized; and how am I
straitened until it be accomplished." (St. Luke XII, 50.)

How strange that the Saviour should sigh for the culmination of
His agony--seek in death His triumph! Our human nature shrinks
from pain. Yet if our lives are to be Christ-like, we must
rather seek to suffer as Christ has taught us by His life of
sorrow.

Trials must surely enter into our lives. 'Tis well we accept
them as coming from the chastening hand of God to purify our
lives and bring us nearer to Himself. Our night of crucifixion
will pass, and then will dawn the glorious morning of our
resurrection in God.

O Mary, who stood beneath the Cross of thy Son and sorrowed in
union with Him, teach us to love the Cross!


The Five Glorious Mysteries

(For Wednesdays and Saturdays throughout the year, and the
Sundays from Easter till Advent.)

The Sorrows of Christ are over. Step by step we have followed
Him, mourning over our sins, and weeping for the agony they have
caused Him. We have entered the Garden of Gethsemane, heard His
three-times repeated prayer, watched the drops of bloody sweat
bedewing the ground on which He lay prostrate. The cruel lashes
that fell upon His Sacred Body have in a manner cut our souls
with bitter pangs for our wrong-doing. Each thorn that pierced
His adorable brow has pierced us too and stirred us to thoughts
of penance. Sorrowing we have moved towards Calvary mingling our
tears with those of Mary, and repenting of the many times when
tempted to sin, we have cried: "Away with Jesus of Nazareth;
crucify Him, crucify Him." In agony have we stood beneath the
Cross, lifting our tear-stained eyes towards Him and hearing Him
murmur: "It is consummated." Yes, the work of Redemption is
done. The gloom is lifted, the agony has passed. Our day of
resurrection is at hand.

First Glorious Mystery:

"The Resurrection"

"And the angel answering said to the women: Fear not you; for I
know that you seek Jesus who was crucified. He is not here, for
He is risen, as He said. Come and see the place where the Lord
was laid."--(St. Matt., XXVIII, 5, 6.)

Rising from Sin

We have learned by bitter experience the sadness of sin; we have
learned how evil and bitter a thing it is to have forsaken the
Lord our God.

Now, rising from the tomb, Christ teaches the mercy of God. He
spoke kindly to the sinful Samaritan woman, He protected the
woman taken in sin, He received from the outcast Magdalen tokens
of her veneration; yea, from the Cross He spoke words of hope to
the penitent thief, and prayed therefrom for every wandering
prodigal: "Father, forgive them."

Let us take courage, cast off the old man and put on the new, so
that the grace of God may abound in our souls.

O Mary, teach us gratitude to God who has forgiven us!


Second Glorious Mystery:

"The Ascension"

"And He led them out as far as Bethania; and lifting up His
hands, He blessed them. And it came to pass, whilst He blessed
them, He departed from them, and was carried up to heaven. And
they adoring went back to Jerusalem with great joy."--(St. Luke,
XXIV, 50, 51, 52.)

Presence of God

"Therefore, if you be risen with Christ, seek the things that
are above; where Christ is sitting at the right hand of God.
Mind the things that are above, not the things that are upon the
earth." (Col. III, 1-2.)

How vile everything earthly appears when compared with the
beauty of God, the beauty that shall be revealed by God to them
that love Him.

If like the saints of old we "walk with God," seeing a
reflection of His loveliness in every beautiful thing in life,
and abide in His holy presence at all times by turning every
thought, word and deed towards Him, we are learning each moment
the lesson of Christ's Ascension. Though now we see "darkly and
as in a mirror," we are moving steadily forward toward the
Divine revelation when we shall see Him face to face, and shall
know even as we are known.

O Mary, teach us always to realize God's holy presence!


Third Glorious Mystery:

"The Descent of the Holy Ghost"

"And when the days of the Pentecost were accomplished, they were
all together in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from
heaven, as of a mighty wind, and it filled the whole house where
they were sitting; and there appeared to them parted tongues as
it were of fire, and it sat upon every one of them. And they
were all filled with the Holy Ghost."--(Acts, 11, 1-4.)

Hearing God's Voice

To know, to love, to serve God--there is our life's work: to
know Him through the works of His hands; to love Him for His
tender mercies towards us; to serve Him by obedience to His holy
law. In fulfilling the duties of our station in life we are
called upon to make sacrifices. Under the guidance of God's
spirit let us sacrifice with a good heart, mindful that God
loveth a cheerful giver. It may be that God shall say: "Friend,
go up higher." "Go sell all that thou hast and give to the poor
and come and follow me." Should God summon us to heroic work for
His sake, let us obey.

O Mary, spouse of the Holy Spirit, teach us to obey heavenly
inspirations!


Fourth Glorious Mystery:

"The Assumption"

"Behold my beloved speaketh to me: Arise, make haste my love, my
beautiful one, and come. For winter is now past, the rain is
over and gone. The flowers have appeared in our land . . . Arise
my love, my beautiful one, and come."--(Canticle of Canticles,
II, 10-13.)

Union with God

We have admired Mary's intimate union with her Divine Son, her
tender watchfulness, her sweet motherly sympathy, her glorious
co-operation in the sacred work of the Redemption. Now that He
has ascended into heaven, she cannot endure separation. Her
ardent love seeks union with the dear object of her love. By
God's will is she borne body and soul to Heaven.

While we are on earth let us strive to be united with God by a
bond of charity, which shall increase as the years go on, and
find its consummation in the heavenly presence.

O Mary, intense lover of God, teach us to love but God alone!


Fifth Glorious Mystery:

"The Coronation"

"And a great sign appeared in heaven; a woman clothed with the
sun, and the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of
twelve stars."--(Apocalypse, XII, 1.)

Perseverance

"He that shall persevere unto the end, he shall be saved" (St.
Matt. X., 22). Mary has entered into her reward, and is crowned
with glory. We still are in the vale of sorrows, still tempted
unto sin. "But God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be
tempted above that which you are able: but will make also with
temptation issue, that you may be able to bear it." (1 Cor. X.,
13.) This thought should steady us in all our trials.

The world may tempt us with its vanities; the flesh may tempt us
with its sensualities; the devil may tempt us with his pride;
but neither world nor flesh nor devil will be stronger than
God's grace that shall be ours in answer to earnest prayer.

O Mary, crowned with glory in Heaven, pray that we may be worthy
to be crowned like thee!



We have woven our spiritual crown of roses at the feet of Mary,
Queen, our Mother of Mercy, whom, after Jesus, we hail as our
life, sweetness and our hope. Mourning and weeping and wandering
in vale of tears, still hopefully have we cried to her, knowing
that she, our powerful advocate in Heaven, will hear our heart-
rending sighs and turn her eyes in love towards us poor banished
children of Eve. And when our exile here below is ended the
clement, the loving, the sweet Virgin Mother of Jesus, will show
us the "Fruit of her womb."

Queen of the Most Holy Rosary, Help of Christians, Refuge of
sinners, pray for us, sinners, now and at the hour of our death.
Amen.



The Confraternity of the Most Holy Rosary

In the same manner as we believe that the summit of Christian
perfection is reached through union with Christ, the fountain of
all perfections, and also through the union of Christians among
themselves; so in order to attain this perfection we are piously
taught that the best means is prayer, and a union and co-
operation with our brethren and neighbors in piety and good
works. It is for this reason that the Church encourages
confraternities, and especially the Rosary Confraternity--the
most ancient and universal in the Catholic Church.

Confraternities of the Rosary, established in Dominican
Churches, not only enjoy the privileges and indulgences which
are common to Confraternities of this character, but also all
the privileges, indulgences, favors and concessions granted to
any other Confraternity of whatever kind or title. (Benedict
XIII, May 26, 1727.) Moreover, the members of the Rosary
Confraternity participate, during life and after death, in all
the good works, merits and suffrages of the three Orders of St.
Dominic.

How to be Admitted into the Confraternity

1. It is necessary to give one's name to a Dominican Priest (or
to a Priest who has Dominican faculties).

2. To have one's name entered in the register.

3. To have beads blessed by a Dominican Father (or by a Priest
who has Dominican faculties).

All Catholics who have the use of reason can be admitted into
the Confraternity. Those absent, the deaf and dumb and the dying
can be admitted, provided that they have expressed their desire.

_Duties_.--The whole fifteen mysteries are to be said by each
associate every week; these mysteries may be said separately.
Meditation (at the least calling the mystery to mind), is
necessary to gain the Indulgences.

The associates do not bind themselves to these duties under any
pain of sin; but if the entire Rosary is not said during the
week, the member will forfeit many of the Indulgences.

Religious and others who by Rule or pious custom say the Rosary
every day, satisfy the obligations of the Confraternity by this
recital, and need not say an additional Rosary.

Indulgences of the Rosary Confraternity

The Indulgences of the Rosary, being very many and very great,
naturally constitute one of the advantages of membership of the
Confraternity. For although some of them may be gained by non-
members, only those who have been enrolled in the Confraternity
can gain all. Before giving the list of some of these spiritual
graces granted by the Church, it is well to bear in mind that
the devotion and the Confraternity have existed for nearly seven
centuries, and that many Pontiffs have added to the number. It
is on record that Pius IX., one day speaking of the innumerable
treasures in the palace of the Popes, took his Rosary in his
hand and said: "Behold the greatest treasure of the Vatican!"

The Rosary is the greatest treasure of the Vatican because the
Vatican has made it so, as the following authentic _List of
Indulgences_ with their conditions will show:

Part I.
Indulgence Granted to Members Only

I.
ON THE DAY OF ADMISSION.

1. _Plenary_.--On condition of Confession, Communion, reception
into Confraternity. (Gregory XIII.)

2. After being received, Confession, Communion in the Church or
Chapel of the Confraternity, recitation of Five Mysteries,
prayers for the Pope's intentions.

_Note_.--These Indulgences can be gained either on the day of
admission or on the Sunday or Feast day following.

II.
THOSE WHO RECITE THE ROSARY.

(a) During the year.

_Plenary_.--Once during life, for the weekly recitation of the
entire Rosary.

For saying the whole Rosary of Fifteen Mysteries, members gain
all the Indulgences granted in Spain to the "Crown of the
Blessed Virgin."

50 _years_, once a day, for those reciting Five Mysteries or a
third part of the Rosary in the Chapel of the Rosary, or in any
part of the Church where the Rosary Altar can be seen. Members
who do not live in a place where the Confraternity is erected
can gain this Indulgence in any Church or public Oratory.
(Adrian VI.)

10 _years_ and 10 _forty days_ for each recital of the Rosary
when said three times in the week. (Leo X.)

7 _years_ and 7 _forty days_, once a week, for saying the whole
Rosary. It is not necessary to say the whole Rosary at one time.
(Pius V.)

5 _years_ and 5 _forty days_ (i. e. 2025 days) for devoutly
pronouncing the Holy Name of Jesus during the recitation of each
Hail Mary. (Pius IX. and Leo XIII.)

2 years on each of the three times when the whole Rosary is
recited during the week.

300 _days_ for saying a third part of the Rosary.

100 _days_ for inducing others to say a third part of the
Rosary.

300 _days_, once a day, for assisting on Sundays or festivals in
a Dominican Church, when the Rosary is said or sung processionally
before carved or painted representations of each Mystery.

(b) On Certain Days and Feasts.

_Plenary_.--Feast of the Annunciation; on condition of
Confession, Communion and recital of the Rosary. (St. Pius V.)

10 _years_ and 10 _forty days_ on the Purification, Assumption,
Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, for reciting the Rosary.

10 _years_ and 10 _forty days_ on Easter, Annunciation,
Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, for reciting a third part of
the Rosary. (St. Pius V.)

7 _years_ and 7 _forty days_ on the other feasts of our Lord and
of the Blessed Virgin on which Mysteries of the Rosary are
celebrated, viz.: Visitation of the Blessed Virgin, Christmas
Day, Purification, Compassion of the Blessed Virgin (Friday
after Passion Sunday), Ascension, Pentecost, and All Saints, for
saying at least Five Mysteries. (St. Pius V.)

7 _years_ and 7 _forty days_ on Christmas Day, the Annunciation,
Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, for the usual weekly
recitation of the whole Rosary.

100 _days_ on the Purification, Annunciation, Visitation,
Assumption, Nativity of the Blessed Virgin.

III.
FOR ASSISTING AT THE PROCESSION OF THE ROSARY.

_Plenary_.--Confession, Communion, assisting at the Procession
on the first Sunday of the month, prayers for the Pope's
intentions, and visiting the Chapel of the Rosary.

_Note_.--This Indulgence may be gained by members traveling by
sea or land, or who are in service (including soldiers on duty),
if they say the entire Rosary; and by those who are sick or
legitimately hindered if they recite a third part of the Rosary.

_Plenary_.--For assisting at the Procession on these feasts of
the Blessed Virgin: Purification, Annunciation, Visitation,
Assumption, Nativity, Presentation, Immaculate Conception; or on
any day within their Octaves.

100 _days_ for assisting at the Procession.

60 _days_ for assisting at the usual Rosary Procession, or at
any other carried out with permission of the Ordinary, or when
they accompany the _Viaticum_ when it is carried in procession
to the sick.

IV.
FOR VISITING THE CHAPEL OR CHURCH OF THE CONFRATERNITY.

_Plenary_.--First Sunday of the month: On condition of
Confession, Communion, visit, with prayers for the Pope's
intentions.

Sick members may gain this, after Confession and Communion, by
reciting Five Mysteries before a pious image, or by saying the
seven penitential psalms.

_Plenary_.--First Sunday of the month, having received the
Sacraments of Penance and Holy Eucharist; prayers before the
Blessed Sacrament exposed in the Church of the Confraternity,
and prayers for the Pope's intentions.

_Plenary_.--Visit to the Chapel or Church of the Confraternity;
Confession, Communion, prayers for the Pope's intentions between
first Vespers and sunset of the following feasts (i e., from
about 1 o'clock P. M. of the vigils of these feasts until sunset
of the feasts themselves), Christmas, Epiphany, Easter,
Ascension, Whitsunday, or any two Fridays in Lent, All Saints,
and any day within eight days after All Souls, on Sunday within
Octave of Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, on the third Sunday of
April.

_Plenary_.--On same conditions, from first Vespers to sunset of
these feasts of the Blessed Virgin, Immaculate Conception,
Nativity, Presentation, Annunciation, Visitation, Purification,
Assumption; and on one day within the Octave of these feasts; on
the Seven Dolorus (Friday after Passion Sunday).

On Easter, Ascension, Whitsunday, on the above feasts of the
Blessed Virgin, and on two Fridays in Lent, the Indulgence can
be gained by visiting _any_ Church or public Chapel.

Travelers by land or sea and those in service can gain the
Indulgence for visiting the Church or Chapel of the Rosary on
all days on which Mysteries of the Rosary are celebrated, if
they recite the entire Rosary (i. e., the Fifteen Mysteries);
the sick or legitimately hindered if they say Five Mysteries.

7 _years_ and 7 _forty days_, Confession, Communion, visit to
Chapel or Altar of the Rosary, with prayers for the Pope's
intentions, on Christmas, Easter, Whitsunday, Immaculate
Conception, Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, Annunciation,
Visitation, Assumption, All Saints.

100 _days, once a day_, for a visit to Chapel or Altar of the
Rosary, with prayers for the Pope's intentions.

_Note_.--Religious women, the inmates of colleges, seminaries,
schools and Catholic institutions who are members, can gain all
the Indulgences which require a visit to the Chapel or Church of
the Confraternity, if they visit their own Church or Chapel.

Sick members and others unable to fulfill the conditions of
Communion or visit, can gain the Indulgences if, after
Confession and other conditions, they perform some pious work
prescribed by their confessor.

For gaining partial Indulgence by the visits, a separate visit
is necessary.

V.
FOR VISITING FIVE ALTARS.

For visiting five Altars in any Church or public Oratory (or who
five times visit one or two Altars where there are not five), on
the appointed days, the same Indulgence as for visiting the
Station-Churches in Rome. (Leo X.)

VI.
FOR SAYING OR HEARING THE VOTIVE MASS OF THE ROSARY.

For hearing this Mass and offering some pious prayers, members
can gain all the Indulgences granted to the recital of the
entire Rosary. Priests who are members gain the same when they
say the Mass as prescribed in Churches where the Confraternity
is established. Dominican Fathers can say this Mass on all
Wednesdays and Saturdays, except on feasts of first and second
class, and a few other special days.

Those who are in the habit of celebrating or hearing this Mass
gain, once a month, all Indulgences granted for the usual
Procession on the first Sunday of the month. Confession and
Communion.

1 _year_ on Saturdays in Lent for assisting at this Mass and at
a Sermon on the Blessed Virgin, and saying the "Hail, Holy
Queen."

VII.
FOR THE DEVOTION OF THE FIFTEEN SATURDAYS.

_Plenary_.--On any three of fifteen consecutive Sundays:
Confession, Communion, visit to Church of Confraternity, with
prayers for Pope's intentions.

7 _years_ and 7 _forty days_ on the other twelve Saturdays.

VIII.
FOR DEVOTIONS DURING OCTOBER.

_Plenary_.--For assisting 10 times at these Devotions in a
Dominican Church: Confession, Communion, prayers for Our Holy
Father's intentions.

7 _years_ and 7 _forty days_ each time assisting at the above.

IX.
FOR ASSISTING AT THE SINGING OF THE SALVE REGINA.

3 _years_ and 3 _forty days_ for assisting at the singing of the
"Salve," on certain festivals, in a Church in which the
Confraternity exists.

100 _days_ for the same every day in the year.

Members who can not assist can gain the Indulgences by kneeling
before an Altar or picture of the Blessed Virgin, saying the
"Hail, Holy Queen."

40 _days_ on all Saturdays and Feasts.

X.
FOR MENTAL PRAYER OR OTHER SPIRITUAL EXERCISES.

_Plenary_.--Once a month, for at least a quarter of an hour's
mental prayer every day for a month: Confession and Communion.

_Plenary_.--Any one day in the year, for prayer, mortification,
and other good works for 40 days, in memory of our Lord's 40
days in the desert.

7 _years_ and 7 _forty days_ for every half hour of mental
prayer.

100 _days_ for every quarter of an hour.

XI.
FOR VISITING SICK MEMBERS.

3 _years_ and 3 _forty days_ for each visit.

100 _days_ for inducing them to receive the Sacraments.

XII.
FOR PRAYING FOR DECEASED MEMBERS.

_Plenary_.--For assisting at the Office of the Dead, which is
said in Dominican Churches on the four Anniversaries of the Dead
(February 4th., July 12th., September 5th., November 10th.):
Confession. Communion, prayers for the Pope's intentions.

8 _years_ for assisting at the funeral service and procession on
Saturdays, or once a month, in a Church of the Confraternity.

3 _years_ and 3 _forty days_ following the body of a deceased
member to the Church of the Confraternity.

100 _days_ for assisting at funerals with the Confraternity
Cross, and at anniversaries of deceased members, with prayers
for the Pope's intentions.

XIII.
FOR ANY PIOUS WORK.

60 _days_ for any work of charity or piety.

XIV.
FOR THE DYING.

_Plenary_.--Can be applied by any Priest in the usual way, even
apart from confession, to all who have been accustomed to say
the Rosary every week. (Innocent VIII.)

_Plenary_.--If having said the entire Rosary at least once, they
die holding the blessed candle of the Rosary. (Adrian VI.)

_Plenary_.--For Confession and Communion.

_Plenary_.--For invoking the name of JESUS with a contrite
heart, if they can not do so with their lips. (Leo XIII.)

_Plenary_.--After receiving the Sacraments, making an act of
faith in the Holy Church, saying the "Hail, Holy Queen," and
commending themselves to the Blessed Virgin.

_Note_.--Any ONE of these Indulgences may be gained, if the
conditions are fulfilled, but not all at the same time.

XV.
FOR THE DEAD.

In all Dominican Churches, the Rosary Altar is privileged for
all Fathers of the Order, on behalf of deceased members.

Moreover, the Rosary Altar is always privileged for any Priest,
even if not a member, and on behalf of any soul.

---

Part II.
Indulgences shared in by all the faithful, whether Members of
the Confraternity or not.

7 _years_ and 7 _forty days_.--For assisting at the Procession
on the first Sunday of the month.

_Plenary_.--TOTIES QUOTIES. ROSARY SUNDAY. Confession,
Communion, visit to the Chapel of the Rosary, or to the Statue
of Our Lady, if exposed to veneration in another part of the
Church, in honor of the victory of Lepanto gained by the prayers
of the Rosary. This Plenary Indulgence may be gained EACH TIME
the visit is repeated, from the first Vespers of the feast (that
is, from about 1 o'clock on Saturday afternoon) until midnight
of Rosary Sunday. During the visits prayers must be said for the
Holy Father's intentions. The confession may be made on the
Friday or Saturday before Rosary Sunday. (St. Pius V.)

_Plenary_.--On Corpus Christi, on the feast of the Patron Saint
of the Church, and on any day within the Octave of Rosary
Sunday: Confession, Communion, visit to the Chapel or Image (as
above), with prayers for the Holy Father's intentions.

_Note.--All the above Indulgences, except that for the hour of
death, can be applied to the Holy Souls._

ADDITIONAL INDULGENCES TO ALL THE FAITHFUL.

_Plenary_.--Once a year, for Five Mysteries every day, using a
Rosary blessed by a Dominican, or by a Priest who has the
faculty: Confession and Communion.

100 _days_ for each "Our Father" and each "Hail Mary," when
saying the entire Rosary, or Five Mysteries on a Rosary blessed
as above. (Raccolta, 194.)

5 _years_ and 5 _forty days_ for every Five Mysteries or a third
part of the Rosary. (Raccolta.)

10 _years_ and 10 _forty days_, once a day, for saying Five
Mysteries with others, either at home or in Church, or in a
public or private Chapel. (Raccolta.)

_Plenary_.--Last Sunday of each month, for Five Mysteries three
times a week as in the preceding: Confession, Communion, visit
any Church or public Chapel, with prayers for the Pope's
intentions.

_Plenary_.--On any one of fifteen consecutive Saturdays, for
Five Mysteries or other devotions to the Mysteries of the
Rosary: Confession, Communion each Saturday, or on Sundays, if
prevented on Saturdays.

7 _years_ and 7 _forty days_ for the same on the other
Saturdays.

_Plenary_.--For any devout Novena of approved prayers in honor
of Our Lady of the Rosary: Contrition, Confession, Communion,
prayers for the Pope's intentions on any day within the Novena
or within eight days after.

300 _days_ on all other days of the above Novena.

FOR OCTOBER DEVOTIONS.

_Plenary_.--On Rosary Sunday, or any day within the Octave:
Confession, Communion, visit to a Church, with prayers for the
Pope's intentions; and provided Five Mysteries are said on the
feast and on every day during the Octave, either publicly in a
Church or in private.

_Plenary_.--For Five Mysteries, either publicly or in private,
on any ten days of October (after the Octave of the Rosary):
Confession, Communion, visit to a Church, and there pray for the
Pope's intentions, on any day at choice.

7 _years_ and 7 _forty days_ every day in October for Five
Mysteries either in Church or in private.

_Note.--All these additional Indulgences are applicable to the
Holy Souls._

The above is an exact Summary of Rosary Indulgences as given in
the Index of Indulgences, approved by Pope Leo XIII, at an
audience granted August 29, 1899.

Since the list just given was approved by Pope Leo XIII, his
successor Pope Pius X, added, or rather renewed, an Indulgence
formerly granted by Pope Innocent VIII., viz., that of 100
_years and as many forty days_ daily to members of the Rosary
Confraternity who carry their Rosary beads about with them (July
31, 1906).

A further concession was made by Pope Pius X. (October 13,
1906). To gain the Indulgences attached to the Rosary it is no
longer necessary to say the Five Mysteries at one time. They may
be separated, and a single Mystery may be said at a time.

CONDITIONS FOR GAINING THE INDULGENCES.

1. The contrition mentioned as required for the gaining of an
Indulgence is not an actual condition, but only a necessary
disposition, and indicated merely that the recipient must be in
the state of grace.

2. Weekly Confession, when habitual, suffices for gaining all
the Indulgences, Plenary and Partial, obtainable within the
week.

3. One Communion suffices to gain many plenary Indulgences.

4. Communion on Saturday, or on the Vigil of a feast, suffices,
provided the other conditions prescribed be performed on the
Sunday or feast following.

5. Those unable to receive Holy Communion at the hour of death
can gain the Plenary Indulgence in which the condition of
Communion is required, by invoking the sacred name of JESUS, at
least in heart when they can not do so by word.

6. The visit to the Church, etc., can be made either before or
after Communion.

7. The prayers offered in the Indulgenced Church at the time of
Mass or Communion suffice for the visit.

8. The Chapels of Convents, Workhouses, Seminaries, etc., may be
looked on as public Oratories in favor of those living in them.

9. The Rosary or other prayers prescribed for gaining the above
Indulgences need not be said kneeling.

10. The Indulgences granted to members of the Rosary
Confraternity are not suspended during the solemn year of the
Jubilee, unless special mention of this fact be made in the
Papal Bull proclaiming the Jubilee Indulgence.

11. Religious and others who live in colleges, seminaries and
schools, and all who live in institutions where they are not
free to go out, provided they are members of the Confraternity,
may gain the Indulgences for which a visit to the Rosary Chapel
or Altar is prescribed, by visiting their own Church or Chapel
if they fulfill the others conditions as well.

12. Sick members who can not receive Holy Communion can have
that obligation, where prescribed, commuted into some other good
work by their confessor, if they go to confession and fulfill
the other conditions.

---

SUMMARY OF INDULGENCES OF DOMINICAN BEADS.

For saying the beads...................................5,500
For pronouncing devoutly the Holy Name of Jesus......101,250
For saying a third part of the Rosary, each time.......2,025
Again for a third part of the Rosary.....................300
For carrying the beads................................40,500
                                                     -------
Total (409 _years_ and 290 _days_ of Indulgences)....149,575
Plus Crozier Indulgence...............................27,500
                                                     -------
                                                     177,075

(485 _years_ and 50 _days_ of Indulgences.)



CONCLUSION.

We will end with the words of Pope Leo XIII, the venerable and
zealous Apostle of the Rosary in the nineteenth century.
Speaking to the rulers of the Church, the Pope says: "For these
reasons the Roman Pontiffs have ever given the highest praise to
this Sodality of our Lady. Innocent VII called it 'a most devout
Confraternity.' Pius V declared that by its virtue 'Christians
began suddenly to be transformed into other men, the darkness of
heresy to be dispelled, and the light of Catholic faith to shine
forth.' We also, Venerable Brethren, moved by the example of our
predecessors, earnestly exhort and conjure you, as we have often
done, to devote special care to this sacred warfare, so that by
your efforts fresh forces may be daily enrolled on every side.
Through you and those of your clergy who have the care of souls,
let the people know and duly appreciate the efficacy of this
Sodality and its usefulness for man's salvation." To the
faithful laity the Pontiff's fatherly words are no less strong:
"For this reason do we exhort all Christians to give themselves
to the daily recital of this pious devotion either in public or
privately in the home or family of each. We believe it to be in
the designs of Providence that, in these times of trials for the
Church, the ancient devotion to the august Virgin should live
and flourish.

"May the Christian people, excited by our exhortations and
inflamed by your appeals, now seek the protection of Mary with
an ardor growing greater day by day. Let them betake themselves
more and more to the protection of Mary, and trust in Her. Let
them cling more and more to the practice of the Rosary, to which
our ancestors had recourse as an ever-ready refuge in misfortune,
and as a glorious pledge and proof of Christian faith and devotion.

"The heavenly Patroness of the human race will receive with joy
these prayers and supplications, and will easily obtain that the
good grow in goodness, and that the erring repent and be brought
back to salvation; that God, who is the avenger of crime, moved
to compassion and mercy, shall deliver Christendom and civil
society from their present dangers, and restore to them that
peace which is so much desired.

"Encouraged by this hope, we beseech God Himself, with the
earnest desire of our heart, to grant you, Venerable Brethren,
every gift of heavenly blessing, through Her in whom He has
placed the fullness of all grace."

Feast of the Most Holy Name of Mary, September, 1915.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Rosary, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROSARY ***

***** This file should be named 58213.txt or 58213.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/2/1/58213/

Produced by Michael Gray, Archdiocese of Portland in Oregon
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

