Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, July 25, 1882, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Harper's Young People, July 25, 1882
       An Illustrated Weekly

Author: Various

Release Date: February 4, 2019 [EBook #58832]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, JULY 25, 1882 ***




Produced by Annie R. McGuire








[Illustration: HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE]

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. III.--NO. 143. PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK. PRICE FOUR
CENTS.

Tuesday, July 25, 1882. Copyright, 1882, by HARPER & BROTHERS. $1.50 per
Year, in Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: ST. ELIZABETH OF THURINGIA.]

ST. ELIZABETH OF THURINGIA.

BY HELEN S. CONANT.


On a beautiful hill near the town of Eisenach, Germany, there stands an
ancient castle, famous in history for the many remarkable events which
have taken place within its walls.

It is called the Wartburg, and it was here, in 1521, that Martin Luther
found shelter and protection after his return from the Diet of Worms.
Within the secure walls of the old castle he spent a peaceful year,
laboring on the translation of the Bible, which has brought light and
joy to so many hearts. The room where he worked, with the table,
book-case, and other furniture, is still carefully preserved.

The Wartburg is one of the oldest castles in North Germany. It was built
about the middle of the eleventh century, by Count Lewis, a very
powerful lord in Thuringia. It is said that one day the Count was out
hunting, when a deer that he was pursuing led him to the foot of a steep
rocky hill, where it plunged up the cliffs, and disappeared in the thick
forest. The Count stopped, surrounded by his followers, and declared
that although the hill had robbed him of the desired game, it should, in
its turn, become his fortress and stronghold. This was a bold
declaration, for the hill was the property of another Count, and it was
against the laws of the great German empire that a man should build on
soil which was not his. But Count Lewis had thought of this. He had
twelve trusty knights, and at his command they worked many hours in the
darkness, carrying soil in baskets from the lands of their master to the
top of the hill, until enough was collected upon which to build a
castle. Then Count Lewis went boldly to work, and erected the fortress
which still crowns the heights above Eisenach.

The counts of Thuringia after this made the Wartburg their home, and it
was here that St. Elizabeth passed her life in holy deeds. Her true
history is that she was a daughter of a King of Hungary, and was born at
Pressburg in 1207. When very young she was betrothed to Lewis, son of
Count Hermann of Thuringia, and brought to the Wartburg to be educated.
As she grew to womanhood she became remarkable for her charitable deeds,
and the family of her young husband complained bitterly that she was
wasting his property. Not long after her marriage her husband died while
absent in the great army of the Crusaders, and Elizabeth with her three
little children was driven away from the Wartburg, and compelled to beg
for bread in the neighboring villages. But the people loved her so much
that her husband's family were soon forced to restore her rights. The
hardships she suffered, and the sacrifices she made, were too heavy for
her to bear, and in 1231 she died, when only twenty-four years old. Four
years after her death she was made a saint by Pope Gregory IX., and a
multitude of beautiful legends were wreathed about her memory. Poets
sung her praises, and the poor who had received food and clothing from
her gentle hands remembered her loveliness and kindness through many
generations.

A German poet of the thirteenth century wrote a life of St. Elizabeth in
verse, which contains some pretty legends about her birth and life. In
1207 Count Hermann of Thuringia called a grand meeting of poets and
minstrels at the Wartburg, and offered a prize to him who should compose
the best poem. From far and near came poets to the competition, and a
vast assemblage of noble lords and ladies were gathered to hear them
sing the quaint ballads of that olden time. One evening the company were
all in the great balcony of the castle, when, a poet, pointing with
prophetic finger to the setting sun, declared that a daughter was at
that moment born to the King of Hungary, who would become the wife of
the son of Count Hermann, and whose wondrous virtue and charity would be
remembered through all coming ages. Count Hermann at once dispatched
messengers to the court of Hungary asking for the hand of the baby
princess for his son, and the betrothal at once took place.

Another beautiful legend is about St. Elizabeth and the roses. Soon
after Elizabeth's marriage to Lewis, the son of Count Hermann, a
terrible famine came upon Thuringia. There was no bread, and the poor
people of the country were compelled to eat roots and wild herbs to keep
from starving. Their sufferings touched the tender heart of Elizabeth,
and she commanded that bread should be baked in the great kitchens of
her castle, which she daily distributed to the poor with her own hands.
It is said that the lives of many hundreds of people were saved by her
bounty. Her husband's family begged him to put a stop to this waste, as
they called it, and to forbid his wife from any longer feeding the poor.
It is said that he yielded to the wishes of his mother and sisters, and
declared that no more bread should be sent out from the castle. So far
the story is true. Now comes the pretty legend which has ever since
caused St. Elizabeth to be pictured with roses in her hands.

Her kind heart could not rest while the poor people around her were
dying of hunger. With a basket filled with bread she would go from the
castle and distribute her bounty among the poor who crowded around her.
One day when starting on this mission of charity, her basket on her arm,
she met her husband, who stopped her, and sternly demanding what she
carried in the basket, tore off the mantle which covered it. To the
astonishment of both the basket appeared filled with fragrant roses, and
on the forehead of Elizabeth, shone a glittering cross. Her husband was
so overcome by what he recognized as a miracle that he gave orders that
in future her noble charities should be done with perfect liberty, and
he himself did all in his power to aid her in the generous task.




UP THE CREEK.

BY WILLIAM O. STODDARD.


"It's a mighty good thing for us, Mort Hopkins, we took such an early
start."

"Say, Quill, what do we want of those rollers?"

"Guess you'll find out 'fore we get the _Ark_ around the dam."

"That's so. All ready? Shove her, now. Here we go. Don't she travel!"

"Mort, what was that long word you went to the foot on yesterday?"

"Me-an-der-ing."

"And you called it 'mean-drying,' and spelled it wrong. Tell you what,
we're just going to meandrew now 'fore we get back."

"Guess Taponican Creek'll give us all the twists we want. It's as
crooked as a ram's horn."

"Tisn't much wider some places, but the _Ark_ will squeeze through 'most
anywhere."

It would not, indeed, have required much of a flood to float a skiff of
that size; but she was a pretty one, and it was no work at all for two
stout boys of from twelve to thirteen years of age to "pole her along."
There was not enough water where they now were to encourage the use of
oars, but a pair of them lay in the stern, beside the fishing-poles and
the bait and luncheon.

The day was one of those truly wonderful Saturdays that come to country
boys in summer, and Mort Hopkins and Quill Sanders had all but slighted
their breakfasts to get the early start they were now so pleased with.

"Mort, if Taponican Creek runs out of Pawg Lake, we'll find the place
where it does."

"Guess we will. It's there, somewhere."

"We won't stop to fish along."

"No, sir! Not one of the boys knows where we're going."

"If they'd ha' known, they'd all have come, and chucked the _Ark_
jam-full."

Mere passengers were not wanted on board of a ship that was clearly
bound on a voyage of discovery. Extra cargo of any kind would have been
bad for the fortunes of such a vessel.

The boys did not pole their boat up stream for more than twenty minutes
before they came to a place where the banks gave the Taponican room to
spread itself. Of course the wider it spread what water it had, the
thinner the water became.

Right in the middle of a sparkling field of gurgling ripples the _Ark_
ran suddenly aground.

"Overboard, Quill!" shouted Mort. "Guess Columbus had to wade before he
found much."

"Noah didn't."

"His ark had a roof on it."

"Shove her, now. There she goes."

Their trousers were rolled up about as high as they would go, and the
water was not very cold. The _Ark_ drew less when its entire crew was
out of it.

"Ah! ugh! Crab."

"Nipped you, did he? Oh, phew! what a clam shell! Stepped right down on
it. Catch your crab?"

"He let go. Can't see him. Didn't he give my heel a dig, though! They're
the ugliest, sassiest--"

"Jump in. She'll float now."

"Shove, or she'll go back, and get aground again."

"There's the dam. Now we've got a job on hand."

The dam was not a high one, but no two boys of their size could have
lifted the _Ark_ over it. Quill Sanders had thought of that, and the
little craft was pulled ashore at a spot where farmers coming to the
mill drove down to water their horses.

"There's just a good road all around from here to the pond. Now for the
rollers, Mort."

Two bits of round poles, about three inches thick and four feet long,
were a great help in getting the _Ark_ up the slope, but it was slow
work for all that. No man in Corry Centre could have hired any two small
boys to undertake it. Quill and Mort did it all the more eagerly because
no living being would have given them a cent for doing it.

The miller came out, indeed, to shout after them:

"Hullo, boys, what're ye up to?"

"Going to Pawg Lake," said Quill, proudly. "Your old dam's in the way,
and we're a-dodgin' 'round it."

"Pawg Lake! I declare! Do ye spect to ever git back agin?"

"Guess we do," said Mort. "Bring you anything when we come?"

"Ye-es. Fetch the lake right along. Bring me the upper eend of the
creek. You'll find it lyin' right there."

"Guess we will," said Mort. "Now, Quill, h'ist her. Shove!"

How they did shove! But the old miller came out into the road and took
the _Ark_ by the head, and after that about all the boys had to do was
to change the rollers forward as the strong-armed fat old fellow dragged
the light skiff along.

"There, boys. You're a plucky brace of spring chickens. In with her,
now. She's afloat agin."

"Thank you, Mr. Getty."

"Don't forget to fetch me back Pawg Lake, when you find it. An' the
crooked eend of the creek."

"Crooked?" said Quill. "Tell you what, I guess we'll have to meandrew
pretty much all the way."

"Andrew what? Oh yes. Guess you will. Go it! Good-by."

Off they went, and now their time had come for actual rowing. The upper
pond of Corry Centre was well known to be a deep one. It was
wonderfully, perilously far from its smooth surface to the home of the
eels on its weedy bottom in some places. It lay in a narrow valley,
however, between the slopes of steep hills, and it was long rather than
wide.

"Isn't this a big thing, Mort? I was never out on any such voyage as
this before. Were you?"

"Don't believe anybody else ever was. Not around here. It's a new
thing."

"Wonder what the boys'll say? Mort, we might hold on here long enough to
catch a fish or two."

"No, sir-ree! We'll just meandrew till we get to Pawg Lake."

They were pulling nicely along just then, quite a distance above the
mill and near the eastern shore of the pond, when a clear, pleasant
voice sang out to them:

"Hey, boys! Put me across the pond, please?"

The manner and the accent of that hail were offensively correct and
polite, and there at the edge of the woody bank stood a young man of
middle size. He carried a joint rod instead of a fish-pole; he had a
sort of butterfly net on a stick, and everything about him was nice and
expensive to that degree which always arouses the hostility of country
village boys. Still, these two were on their good behavior that morning,
and their hearts were a little warm over the conduct of Mr. Getty. The
_Ark_ was pulled ashore and the stranger was taken on board.

"Straight across, please. Nice boat you have. Capital fun for bright
young fellows like you. Spending your day out of school on the water?
Good idea."

"Course it is," said Mort, but Quill Sanders added:

"I say, mister, got any fish in your basket yet?"

"Not one, my boy. No luck at all this morning."

"Guess you won't catch any 'round here, with all that there fancy
rigging."

"Think not? Ah, here we are. Put me ashore. Will a dime apiece do?"

He held out a couple of bits of shining silver as he spoke, but he had
already stirred the pride of the crew of the _Ark_.

"No, thank you," said Quill Sanders. "We're on a voyage of discovery. We
won't take pay for any kindnesses we do to the natives we meet."

"You don't say! Voyage of discovery. New World. All that sort of thing.
Arctic circle. North Pole. Sandwich Islands."

"No, sir-ree!" exclaimed Mort. "We're bound for Pawg Lake. All the way
up the Taponican."

"That's this mighty stream, I suppose, and Pawg Lake is at the
mysterious end of it. Boys, it isn't of any manner of use. I'm not a
native. Only stopping in the village for a week. You've got to take me
on board the--the what's her name?"

"The _Ark_," said Mort, with much dignity, "and we're not calling for
passengers."

"Passengers? Oh no, I'm one of the crew. I'd ship before the mast if
there was one. Just let me take those oars and work my watch on deck.
Then I'll go below while you take yours."

He had again seated himself, even while he was speaking, and Mort
Hopkins hardly knew why he didn't resist the sudden seizure of those
oars.

Then there came a surprise to both of them, for the stranger made the
_Ark_ spin around, and get her head up stream, and glide away over the
water, after a fashion to which she was entirely unaccustomed.

"Quill," said Mort, "he can row."

"Mister," said Quill, "did you bring any lunch with you?"

"I did, my young friend. I am provisioned for the voyage. Is it a long
one?"

"All the way up Taponican Creek, and it just meandrews."

"You don't say! Have to tack around the short corners, and all that
sort of thing. Are the natives at all dangerous?"

"Never been there," said Mort, "'cept once, when father and Uncle Hiram
and the Dutch house-painter went to Pawg a-fishin', and took me along."

"Did they catch anything?"

"Guess they did; but they had things to catch 'em with. Something better
than that there whip-stalk and a spool o' thread."

"They were wise men. We will see what we can do when we get there. Nice
boat this is. I can make her meandrew all the way. If we don't discover
something, it won't be our fault."

"He just can row," began Quill to Mort, but at that moment the stranger
began to pull a little more slowly, and they could hardly believe their
ears. He struck into a ringing, musical song that kept time with the
oars. That was surprise enough, but what made it bad was that they could
not understand one word he was singing.

"Quill," whispered Mort, "I was pop sure he wasn't born in this country.
He's a foreigner."

They were out of the pond now, and there was no question whatever of the
crookedness with which the creek wound its way in and out among the
pastures and meadows. There was nowhere a very strong current, and the
boys were a little surprised to find their favorite stream at once so
deep and so narrow. Its character was very different from any it was
able to earn below the pond and down through the village.

"It's awful clean, though," said Quill, "and there's any amount of trees
and bushes along the banks."

"Boys," exclaimed the stranger at last, "I'm going to try one of these
shady hollows for a trout. Quill, you take an oar, and paddle me along
slowly into that black-looking cove up yonder. I'll show you something
new. Mort, you get back into the stern."

"He knows our names," muttered Mort.

But it was no fault of theirs if he did not. He gave Quill a few more
directions, and then he stood well forward, with the light graceful rod
they had called a "whip-stalk" poised in his right hand. The wind was
gently blowing up stream, and the stranger said, very quietly:

"That'll do. Steady, now."

And then they heard the faint hum of the reel on his rod, and a gossamer
flight of fine line, with three little bits of fuzzy things at the end
of it, each about the size of a small gray moth, dropped on the water as
light as thistle-down.

It was a beautiful cast, if the boys had but known it, and the flies
alighted in a spot of dark water almost under the bank, where a little
eddy made a faint ripple on the surface.

[Illustration: "SOMETHING BRIGHT AND VIGOROUS SPRANG CLEAR OUT OF THE
WATER."]

Splash! Something bright and vigorous sprang clear out of the water!

"Struck! I'll get him. Steady, Quill; don't pull a stroke. He's a heavy
one this time. I must give him all the line he wants. He's off up
stream."

How that reel did buzz, and how the excited boys did watch the motions
of their new acquaintance!

"He'll run all the way to Pawg," said Mort.

"Not with that hook in him," said Quill. "See! he's a-winding him up
again."

The reel was a "multiplier," and the line came in swiftly enough, for
the fisherman had "snubbed" his victim, and turned him toward the boat.
Out and in, again and again, went the line, but at last the boys had
seen the prize, and knew it was a bigger speckled trout than they
supposed Taponican contained.

"Here he comes! Now for the net!"

Both his young friends had long since decided that that machine was
designed for "catching minnies," but now its round loop was skillfully
thrust under the exhausted fish, as he allowed himself to be dragged
alongside. No strain on the slender line. Only a quick, easy "lift," and
then a beauty of a trout, more than a pound in weight, lay flopping on
the bottom of the _Ark_.

"Whoop! hurrah!"

"Isn't he a buster?"

"Just look at his spots, Quill."

"We never catch 'em, 'cause they feed on flies, and you have to scoop
'em in."

"Now, boys, more fun."

They were ready for it, and there was plenty of it all the way to Pawg.
The trout were biting freely, and every eddy and circling pool on which
the interesting stranger's flies alighted yielded up its share of
glittering spoil.

"This is your lake? Upon my word, it's a pretty one. There's an island
right out in the middle. Boys, we must go and discover that island.
It'll be a good place to eat our lunch in. Did you know it was about
time for seamen like us to eat something? It hadn't occurred to me
before, but I am as hungry as a bear!"

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




SEA-ANEMONES.

BY SARAH COOPER.


Many of you, no doubt, have learned, when at the sea-shore, the delight
of climbing over wet rocks covered with slippery sea-weed, and peering
into the little pools left between the stones to see if the great waves
have dropped any treasures from the ocean. Those who have enjoyed this
pleasure will gladly recall the sparkling pools, carpeted with
rich-colored sea-weeds which half conceal the timid animals that live
there.

In such pools the rocks, the shells, and the sea-weeds all have richer
tints from the bright water that covers them, and one who loves
beautiful things will linger beside the pools as if gazing into
enchanted gardens.

On searching these rock pools we should find many curious animals. None
would interest us more than the sea-anemone, though when we find it
hiding in some dark corner, with its tentacles all drawn in, and looking
like a soft brown lump, it may not promise much beauty.

The sea-anemone adheres firmly to the rocks, so we will not pull it off.
If we watch long enough we shall see it begin to rise in the middle, and
from the summit will creep out, very slowly and softly, beautiful
tentacles like a wreath around the top. It is now that this singular
animal looks like a flower, and deserves the name that it possesses. I
think, though, it is not so much like the anemone as it is like a
chrysanthemum or some other flower with a great many petals. You would
be charmed with the delicate light-colored tentacles waving gently in
the water.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.--STOMACH AND CHAMBERS OF SEA-ANEMONE.]

In the middle of the tentacles is the mouth, leading into a hollow sac,
which is the stomach. The remainder of the body is divided by partitions
from top to bottom into open chambers. In Fig. 1 you will see the
stomach at _a_, and the chambers at _b_.

There is an opening at the bottom of the stomach through which the food
passes after being digested. Sea-water also enters the body through the
stomach, and both the water and the nourishment circulate freely through
the chambers. Each tentacle is a hollow tube connected at its base with
one of the chambers, and readily filled with water. Here we have an
explanation of the mysterious manner in which the sea-anemone swells
itself out and then shrinks away again. The body and tentacles are
enlarged by drawing in water to fill them, and when they are suddenly
contracted the water is forced out through the mouth.

The sea-anemone has no hard skeleton whatever; all parts of the body are
soft, like a stiff jelly. It can draw its tentacles in out of sight, and
it will do so upon the slightest alarm, rolling itself into an ugly lump
like the one we found. Allow it to remain quiet for a while, however,
and it will blossom out as gorgeously as ever.

When any little crab, or worm, or small fish brushes past the tentacles,
the lasso-cells are darted out to paralyze it, and the tentacles seize
the prey and pass it to the mouth. The bones or shells which remain
after the meal are thrown out from the mouth. The tentacles hold the
prey tightly, so that even cunning crabs can not escape, and you know it
is not the easiest thing in the world to catch a crab and hold it.

Sea-anemones are greedy creatures. It takes a great deal of food to
satisfy their appetites, and their mouths can be extended to receive
quite large animals. They eat mussels and cockles by sucking the body
out of its shell. Great numbers of sea-anemones, in their turn, are
devoured by other animals, their soft bodies offering little resistance.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.--CLUSTER OF ANEMONES.]

The variety of color in these animals is almost endless. Some of them
are rich olive and chocolate colors, or purple dotted with green. One
beautiful species has violet tentacles pointed with white; another, red
tentacles speckled with gray. This one spreads out its green arms edged
with a circle of dead white, while that one opens a milk-white top
circled with a border of pink. In Fig. 2 is a cluster, of beautiful
anemones. The two small ones at the right show how these creatures look
when closed.

Some sea-anemones which live in exposed situations are of a dull, dusky
brown, covered with rough warts, while animals of the same species,
living in deep water, where there is less need of concealment, have
smooth skins adorned with brilliant tints of rose, scarlet, or light
green. This is a beautiful provision of Nature for protecting the little
creatures by rendering them inconspicuous when left upon rocks by the
retreating waves.

The number of eggs produced by sea-anemones seems almost incredible. A
single animal is said to throw out three hundred eggs in one day. The
eggs are little jelly-like lumps which are formed on the inside of the
partitions, and are thrown out from the mouth. After swimming about by
means of hair-like appendages called cilia, they settle on some solid
body and begin to grow. Sometimes the young ones remain within the body
of the parent until their tentacles have grown. They are then ready to
settle down soon after reaching the water.

Sea-anemones increase by budding as well as by eggs. At the lower edge
of the body little round knobs are sometimes formed, which separate from
the parent and grow into perfect animals. If the tentacles or other
parts of the body are removed, new tentacles soon grow in their places.
If an individual is torn in pieces, each fragment has the power of
forming for itself a mouth and throwing out tentacles, and becoming a
new sea-anemone, perfect in all its parts.

Most species live in holes among the rocks, attached to stones or
shells, over which they slide in a clumsy manner. They are especially
fond of deep dark grottoes, and when they have taken full possession of
such a place, they may be found clinging to the sides and roof of the
cave, and displaying their charms without reserve. Although they do not
enjoy the glare of the bright sun, they expand best in mild, clear
weather, and remain closed when the sea is rough and stormy.

A few of these animals float on the ocean. One sea-anemone is fond of a
roving life, and having no very good means of travelling about, it
attaches itself to the back of a certain kind of crab, and accompanies
the crab in all its wanderings. There seems to be an attraction between
the two, and one is rarely seen without the other.

Another species is mostly found clinging to the shell of a whelk, but
for certain good reasons it never clings to a living one. The whelk
burrows in the sand. This would be disagreeable and inconvenient to the
anemone, so it prefers a dead shell which has been taken possession of
by a hermit-crab, and henceforth travels about with the crab. We would
scarcely look for affection in a crab, but it has been said that the
hermit grows fond of its companion, and that when it has outgrown its
shell and has selected a new one, it will carefully lift the anemone
from the old home and place it on the new one, "giving it several little
taps with its big claws to settle it."

I hope that none of you will fail to hunt up these lovely rock pools
when you have an opportunity. The pleasure of a visit to the sea-shore
is greatly increased by an interest in the strange forms of animal life
which we see there and nowhere else. A glass jar filled with sea-water
is often a source of great delight. In it you may drop any
strange-looking object that has excited your curiosity. Perhaps this
strange object may prove to be some odd little animal which is not yet
dead, but which will revive with the touch of the life-giving water.

Most of these animals are timid, but they will expand when they are left
perfectly still. In this way we may watch their habits and their hidden
beauties. Sea-anemones do nicely in such an aquarium, and as they cling
to the side of the jar, we can observe all parts while they are in
action. By far the pleasantest way to learn about them is to let them
tell their own story. The water must be changed frequently, for
impurities are constantly passing from the bodies of even these delicate
animals. They will soon die if placed in fresh-water.




"THE MINUTE-HAND OF THE CLOCK."[1]

[1] The great English Cathedral of St. Paul's is said to have witnessed
a somewhat similar adventure.

A GERMAN BOY'S ADVENTURE.

BY DAVID KER.


"Kaspar, thou little rogue, how often shall I tell thee not to meddle
with that clock?"

"I was only watching the wheels go round, father," said a sturdy little
fellow in a soiled leathern jacket, starting up with a half-mischievous
look in his blue eyes.

"And what hast _thou_ to do with the wheels, eh? Suppose this clock is
stopped or put wrong some day by one of thy tricks, what shall I, Hans
Scheller, custodian of St. Martin's Church, say to the Town Council?
Dost thou know what birch porridge is, thou rogue? Beware, or I'll give
thee such a taste of it as shall make thee go round faster than the
wheels."

Poor Hans was indeed kept in constant terror by his inquiring son's
uncontrollable habit of going wherever he ought not. The old Church of
St. Martin was a famous play-ground for any boy, with its shadowy
aisles, and countless pillars, and tall towers, and deep niches, and
half-ruined battlements; and the worthy custodian, when he awoke from
his after-dinner nap in his little room at the foot of the great clock
tower, never knew whether he should find his hopeful boy hiding behind
the altar-screen, trying to blow the organ bellows, playing
hide-and-seek among the pinnacles of the roof, or sitting astride of a
carved spout a hundred and sixty feet above the pavement.

All this, however, might have been forgiven; for the old custodian was
really as fond of his "little rogue" as the boy, with all his wildness,
was of him. But the one thing that Hans could not pardon was the danger
caused by his son's restless inquisitiveness to his beloved church
clock. It was his pride and glory to be able to tell every one that
during the whole forty years that he had been in charge of the "St.
Martin's Kirche," the clock had never stopped or gone wrong; and nothing
would convince him that it was not by far the finest clock in the whole
world.

"Don't tell _me_ of the big clock of Strasburg Cathedral," he would say,
with an obstinate shake of his gray head. "Could _it_ go forty years on
end, think you, without the slightest deviation? No, that it couldn't,
nor any other clock on the face of the earth except this one."

Mindful of Kaspar's inquiring turn of mind, his father, having to do
some marketing in the town the day after our hero's stolen visit to the
clock, locked the door of the tower, and took the key along with him.

"No harm can happen now," he muttered; "and, in any case, I shall be
back before he gets out of school."

But, as ill-luck would have it, the teacher was called away by some
business that afternoon, and the boys got out of school more than an
hour earlier than usual. Kaspar, finding his father gone, went straight
to the door of the clock tower, and looked rather blank on discovering
that it was locked. But he was not one to be easily stopped when he had
once made up his mind. Getting out upon the roof, and crawling along a
cornice where only a cat or a school-boy could have found footing, he
crept through an air-hole right into the clock-room.

For some time he was as happy as a child in a toy shop, running from one
marvel to another, until at length he discovered another hole, and
thrusting his head through it, found himself looking down upon the
market-place through the face of the clock itself. But when he tried to
withdraw his head again, it would not come.

It was such a queer scrape to be in that Kaspar was more inclined to
laugh than to be frightened; but suddenly a thought struck him which
scared him in earnest: his neck was in the track of the minute-hand,
which, when it reached him, must inevitably tear his head off!

Poor Kaspar! it was too late now to wish that he had left the clock
alone. He tried to scream for help, but with his neck in that cramped
position, the cry that he gave was scarcely louder than the chirp of a
sparrow. He struggled desperately to writhe himself back through the
hole; but a piece of the wood-work had slipped down upon the back of his
neck, and held him like a vise.

On came the destroyer, nearer and nearer still, marking off with its
measured tick his few remaining moments of life. And all the while the
sun was shining gayly, the tiny flags were fluttering on the booths of
the market, and the merry voices of his school-fellows who were playing
in the market-place came faintly to his ears, while he hung there
helpless, with Death stealing upon him inch by inch. His head grew
dizzy, and the measured beat of the ticking sounded like the roll of a
muffled drum, while the coming hand of the clock looked like a monstrous
arm outstretched to seize him, and the carved faces on the spouts seemed
to grin and gibber at him in mockery. And still the terrible hand crept
onward, nearer, nearer, nearer.

"What _can_ that thing in the clock face be?" said a tourist below,
pointing his spy-glass upward. "Why, I declare it looks like a boy's
head!"

"A boy's head!" cried a gray-haired watchmaker beside him (one of Hans
Scheller's special friends), snatching hastily at the glass as he spoke.
"Why, good gracious! it's little Kaspar. He'll be killed! he'll be
killed!" And he rushed toward the church, shouting like a madman.

The alarm spread like wild-fire, and before Klugmann, the watchmaker,
had got half-way up the stairs leading to the tower, more than a score
of excited men were scampering at his heels. But at the top of the stair
they were suddenly brought to a stand-still by the locked door.

"It's locked!" cried Klugmann in tones of horror, "and Hans must have
taken the key with him, for it isn't here."

"Never mind the key," roared a brawny smith behind him. "Pick up that
beam, comrades, and run it against the lock. All together now!"

Crash went the door, in rushed the crowd, and Kaspar, now senseless from
sheer fright, was dragged out of his strange prison just as the huge bar
of the minute-hand actually touched his neck. And so it fell out that
poor old Scheller, coming home for a quiet afternoon nap, found the door
of the tower smashed in, his son lying in a swoon, and his little room
crowded with strange men all talking at once.

But from that day forth Kaspar Scheller never meddled with the church
clock again.




MR. STUBBS'S BROTHER.[2]

[2] Begun in No. 127, HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE.

BY JAMES OTIS,

AUTHOR OF "TOBY TYLER," "TIM AND TIP," ETC.

CHAPTER XVII.

DRIVING A MONKEY.


For an hour this tantalizing work was continued, and the pursuers were
nearly exhausted. Leander, who was naturally a very slow-moving boy, was
more quickly tired than the others. When for at least the twentieth time
they thought they had the monkey within their grasp, and he darted to
the top of one of the tallest trees, Leander declared he could not take
another step, even though the life of the monkey and the success of the
circus depended upon it.

Of course it was not to be thought of that they should leave their band
there exhausted and alone, so Toby decided they should rest as long as
Mr. Stubbs's brother remained in the tree, and it was determined to
occupy the time by eating the luncheon Aunt Olive had prepared.

During the last ten minutes of the chase Leander's face had worn a very
gloomy expression; but it lightened wonderfully when the package of food
was opened, and Toby helped him to a large slice of bread and meat.

Nor was Leander the only one who looked with favor upon the food. Mr.
Stubbs's brother had been a close observer of all that was going on at
the foot of the tree in which he had taken refuge, and he showed every
disposition to make one of the eating party.

Seeing his evident hunger, Toby was sure it would be possible to capture
the monkey by means of the food, and he walked around the trunk of the
tree, holding a piece of gingerbread temptingly in his fingers.

The monkey came down from branch to branch, as if he had decided to
allow himself to be made a prisoner for the sake of the food; but just
as Toby was about to seize him, he jumped back with a cry that sounded
much as if he were laughing at the disappointment he had caused.

Then Joe tried his skill, coming about as near success as Toby had done;
and Leander was roused to action by the new phase the chase had assumed.
He too held out some food in order to give Mr. Stubbs's brother the
impression that all he had to do was to come and get it.

In thus trying the coaxing plan, all three of the boys got on one side
of the tree, while the greater part of their provisions was on the
opposite side.

The monkey descended again, first toward one boy and then toward
another, as if it were his purpose to allow all three to catch him, and
all were equally certain they were about to succeed, when Mr. Stubbs's
brother suddenly ran along the branches toward the food. Before it was
possible for any of the boys to intercept him, he had dropped to the
ground, seized two of the very largest pieces of cake, and was up in the
tree again so quickly that but for the cake he had in his paws it might
have been doubted whether or not he had been on the ground at all.

Now Mr. Stubbs's brother could laugh at his pursuers, if it is possible
for a monkey to laugh; for, without any thanks to them, he had a trifle
more than his share of the provisions, and was still at liberty.

"It ain't any use," said Joe, in despair, as he threw himself on the
ground, and attacked the luncheon savagely. "I don't believe we shall
ever get him; an' if we don't, it won't be much use for us to have our
show, for every real circus has a monkey."

"We _must_ catch him," replied Toby, mournfully, looking up into the
tree where his pet sat eating the stolen food with the greatest possible
enjoyment. "I wouldn't go home an' leave him here if I had to stay all
night."

"One might watch here while the others went back to the village an' got
every feller there to come out an' help," suggested Leander, who was
famous for having ideas so brilliant that no one could carry them into
execution.

"We're goin' away from home all the time this way," said Toby, after he
had studied the matter carefully, without paying any attention to the
suggestion made by Leander; "now let's get a little ways the other side
of the tree, an' when he comes down again he'll have to go toward home.
Even if we can't catch him, perhaps we can drive him into the village."

Even Leander could see the wisdom of this plan, and the party moved
their luncheon and themselves to the side of the tree opposite to that
on which they had approached it.

Of course there was nothing to do but wait Mr. Stubbs's brother's
pleasure in the matter, and he seemed to be in no haste to make a move.
He ate his cake in the most leisurely fashion possible, and then
appeared to be wonderfully interested in the leaves, for he would spend
several minutes pulling one apart, probably to see how it was made.

But he was obliged to come down at last, and he chose the time just as
Leander had settled himself comfortably for a nap, which did not tend to
make the band regard him with additional favor.

As Toby had thought, the monkey started back in the direction they had
come; and as he was going toward home, they did not make any effort to
hurry him. If they could not catch him, they could at least drive him,
and they were satisfied to let him go as slowly as he chose--a plan
which met with hearty approval from Leander.

For some time Mr. Stubbs's brother moved along as if it were his
greatest desire to be back at Uncle Daniel's again, and then Toby saw
him run along swiftly as if he had found something under a tree which
interested him greatly.

Afraid that the monkey had done this simply to avoid being driven, and
that he might dart through the under-brush and get in the rear of them
again, Toby ran forward quickly; but before he had taken more than a
dozen steps he heard piercing shrieks, which evidently came from the
monkey, while the commotion among the bushes indicated that a struggle
of some kind was taking place there.

With but one thought, and that for the safety of his pet, Toby ran ahead
regardless of the bushes that tore his clothing and scratched his face.
A struggle was going on, as he saw when he pulled the branches of the
trees away, and Mr. Stubbs's brother was getting decidedly the worst of
it.

A small, prickly ball curled up at the foot of the tree, and the monkey
striking at it savagely with his paws, while porcupine quills were
sticking in his face and body, told the whole story.

The monkey had seen the porcupine, and, much to his discomfort, had
tried to make that animal's acquaintance. As every boy knows, when one
of these animals is attacked it immediately rolls itself up into a ball,
with the quills or spines sticking straight out, and the attacking party
generally gets plentifully supplied with them in a very short time.

It was some moments before Toby could persuade his pet to stop trying to
inflict punishment when he was getting the greater part himself; but he
pulled him away at last, and the porcupine, unrolling himself with a
grunt of satisfaction, trotted away into the bushes.

There was no disposition on the part of Mr. Stubbs's brother to run away
again. He stood there looking as sad and discouraged as a monkey ought
to look who had commenced his day's work by stealing ducks, and
concluded it by fighting a porcupine.

[Illustration: MR. STUBBS'S BROTHER AFTER HIS ENCOUNTER WITH THE
PORCUPINE.]

The quills stood out from his face, making him look as if sadly in need
of shaving, while on almost every inch of his body there was one of
these natural weapons, giving him a decidedly comical appearance.

As he stood there holding out his paws to Toby as if asking him to
extract the spines, and squinting down now and then at those in his
face, the boys did not try to restrain their laughter, which appeared to
make the inquisitive monkey very angry.

He screamed and scolded in the shrillest tones until Toby set about
picking out the quills for him, and Joe took a firm hold of his collar
to make sure he should not escape when he was relieved from the effects
of his introduction to the porcupine.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




[Illustration: PLAYING DOCTOR.]




A RACE FOR LIFE.

BY H. W.


I dare say you have often seen Assam on the map, and have often tasted
Assam tea. The tea gardens are a very pretty sight at certain seasons of
the year. I would like to send you a photograph of my garden. From the
high ground near we can see the far-off Himalayas, with their snow-clad
summits gleaming brightly in the sun.

  "Far off the old snows, ever new,
  With silver edges cleft the blue--
    Alone, aloft, divine."

But I am quite sure you won't care to hear about snowy mountain-tops,
and unspeakable sunsets, and other glories of the Himalayan Alps, but
boy-like will want to know if I have had any adventures since I came
out. This is a great country for wild beasts of all sorts. Not long ago
I was walking in the garden with a friend of mine; we were moving along
slowly and chatting, when suddenly my friend shouted out something which
I could not understand, and vanished like--a lamp-lighter. I looked
around to see if there was anything to account for such an unceremonious
leave-taking, when, turning the corner, I too was aware of two great
bears that barred the way. It was an awkward predicament, and I must
confess I was somewhat taken aback, and did not quite know what to do.
However, after a good stare, the bears relieved me of all further
anxiety by taking themselves quietly off.

Completely unarmed as I was, I was only too thankful to see them safely
off the premises.

The other day I had a still more unpleasant adventure; and this time, as
before, among the principal actors in the scene was an angry bear. I
went to see a friend of mine, a neighboring planter, who lived some
miles away. I had a friend staying with me; we went in a small
pony-cart; I drove, my friend sat alongside me, and behind was the syce,
or native groom. The first part of our return journey was accomplished
without any mishap. When, however, we came to the last part of the
journey--the last mile or so, I should say, was simply a roadway cut
through the jungle--we were surprised to hear a low grunting noise, and
a rustling in the ditch that ran alongside the road--a noise as of some
large beast forcing himself through the thick undergrowth.

We in front took but little notice of it, under the impression that it
was a pig or dog, or something of the kind. You can imagine my horror,
and amazement when I felt myself convulsively grasped by the syce, and
heard him whispering in agonized tones, "He'll have me off in a minute,
sahib, if you don't drive on quickly." Turning round as I best could
under the circumstances, I saw a huge bear lumbering along, now on his
hind-legs, now on all fours, every now and then making ineffectual
"scoops" at the frightened syce on the backseat with his ugly-looking
fore-paws.

With a smart cut across the back and a word of encouragement, I started
the pony off at his best pace. On he galloped, as fast as ever he could
lay his little legs to the ground; but Bruin was not to be denied, and
we could not, do what we would, shake him off.

It was a most exciting race. I had to keep cool, for on me, the driver,
all depended, and the least mistake on my part might have cost us our
lives.

After racing along for some distance in this way, with the bear now
alongside us, now close behind us, by some fortunate accident one of our
coats fell out on to the road. Bruin instantly halted to have a sniff,
but after a moment's pause he was under way again, and before long had
overhauled us. Once more "ding, dong, ding, dong, we galloped along,"
racing for very life. Every turn of the wheels was bringing us nearer
home, and if our pony could only last the distance, there was still a
good chance for us. As we thus raced along, with the bear hustling after
us, so close that we could hear his heavy breathing, my "solah topee"
(hat) fell off, and Bruin once more stopped to have a sniff.

All honor to that hat! Had its brim been less broad, the wind would not
have taken it off. Had the wind not taken it off, who can tell what our
fate would have been? The pony was nearly exhausted; his speed was
slackening, and in a moment the bear would have had us in his clutches.

But that moment's delay in Bruin's frantic chase saved us. Heavily I
plied the whip upon our unfortunate pony's back. A few leaps carried us
forward another hundred yards, and our bungalow came in sight. The bear
realized that he was beaten, and slunk off into the jungle, leaving us
to go home in peace. We were very thankful to get out of it so well.
When our friends were told that we had been chased by a bear they could
hardly believe it, but the story is true for all that. Three lives were
saved by the puff of wind that blew away my hat.




TRAPPING TORUPS.

BY ALLAN FORMAN.


"Say, boys, I have an idea," Charlie Swan announced one morning as he
was sitting on the porch of the farm-house where he and his cousins were
spending the summer.

"Let's have it," said Jack, one of the cousins.

"Well, it's just this. You know the pond is full of torups. I believe we
boys can have some fun catching them."

"Pooh!" interrupted Jack, "we've had that idea for a long time. How are
you going to do it?"

"With a trap," answered Charlie, looking very wise.

"Who ever heard of trapping terrapin?"

"I don't see why it can't be done."

"What kind of a trap would you use?"

"Come out to the shop, and I'll show you," replied Charlie.

While the boys are in the shop I will explain, for the benefit of my
readers who do not live near the water, what a torup is. It is a member
of the turtle family, and closely resembles the far-famed terrapin of
Chesapeake Bay, but it differs from the terrapin in that it lives in
either fresh or salt water, rather preferring the fresh, and burying
itself in the mud for a greater part of the time. Consequently its flesh
acquires a muddy flavor that many people do not like. The torup has all
the ferocity of the snapping-turtle, and when aroused will display
wonderful agility in jumping at its enemies. In common with the rest of
the turtle family, it has the peculiarity, as the Irishman expressed it,
of "living a long time after it's dead." I have seen one bite through a
lead-pencil six hours after the head had been separated from the body.
Another trait of the torup, which Charlie meant to take advantage of in
making his trap, is that he will crawl into anything or under any log
beneath which he can possibly force himself, resistance only seeming to
make him more obstinate in the accomplishment of his purpose.

Before long Charlie and his cousins came out of the shop, carrying with
them the trap. It was only a box about three feet long, two feet high,
and eighteen inches wide. He had taken out one end, and fastened it to
the top by two strong hinges, so that it opened inward. About half-way
down each side he had driven two pegs, so that the door could be pushed
in, but not out. On the bottom were nailed several strips of old iron.

"I don't see how you are going to work it," said Walter, as he followed
Charlie toward the pond.

"Well, I'll explain," replied Charlie. "You see that this door is so
hung that the torup can push it in and go in, but can't push it out
after he gets in."

"Yes."

"Now I shall put a few old bones, with some meat on them, in the box for
bait. The torup will smell them, will push up the door, and crawl into
the box; then when he tries to get out again, he finds that he can't."

"All right," replied the boys, and in a few minutes Charlie was with
them at the edge of the pond, putting the bones in the further end of
the box. They sunk it carefully, and Charlie drove a stick on each side,
so that it could not be tipped over or dislodged from its place. Nothing
now remained to be done but to wait until the next morning.

When the morning came they rushed to the pond, Charlie full of
confidence, and his cousins rather disposed to make fun of his trap.
When they tried to lift it into the boat they found it quite heavy, and
Charlie exclaimed, joyfully, "Its full!"

"Yes, full of water," replied Jack, scornfully.

"We will see," replied Charlie, as he lifted the box into the boat. In a
moment more he pulled out the two pegs, and the door swung outward. Out
tumbled four large torups.

"Well, I never!" exclaimed Jack, in surprise. The torups manifested
their dissatisfaction by snapping viciously as the boys came near them.

After that the box was set several times with varying results, and the
boys did a good work in destroying a large number of torups; for not
only do they make it almost impossible for fish to live in a pond, but
they will also destroy young ducks by catching them by the feet and
dragging them beneath the water, where they devour them alive.




HOW THEY HELPED THE DEACON.

BY ADA CARLETON STODDARD.


"Cherries? I should say so! There's no end to 'em--trees are loaded, and
red's a burning-bush. I was by there to-day."

It was an intensely eager voice, and Davy Kent, the speaker, ended his
little speech with an expressive smack of the lips.

"He'd never miss the few we'd take, would he, boys?" That was Ned
Rogers. It was upon a straw pile behind Mr. Rogers's barn that the boys
were holding an earnest consultation.

"Miss 'em? No, not if we took twice as many as we will."

"A bushel will be enough to treat the whole crowd, won't it?"

"Oh, any amount."

"Now see here, boys"--and Clem Goodrich lifted himself into a sitting
posture and knit his brows thoughtfully as he spoke--"I think--isn't
this--doesn't it seem a little bit like stealing? Don't you suppose he'd
give us a few if we were to ask him? It looks to me--"

But right here Clem's mild voice was drowned in a roaring, boisterous
chorus.

"It's not staling, me boy," said Con O'Brien, with the faintest brogue
in the world; "it's only helping ourselves to a few cherries, that
otherwise might spoil for want o' the picking, and so be wasted
intirely. And if Deacon Gammon don't know it, he'll be none the wiser,
for he's got piles and hapes more'n he can take care of. Ten to one
he'll be obliged to us for helping him out a little--he isn't a bad old
gintleman at heart, you know. And it's for the fun of it as well as the
ating we take 'em, and that's the truth."

"So 'tis," echoed a good many of the boys.

As for Clem, he gazed into Con's serious face doubtfully, yet, it must
be confessed, very willing to be convinced.

"I suppose you know best," said he--"you fellows that have lived here
all your lives."

"Of course," laughed Jerry Parker. "Why, my father says he always plants
an extra melon seed for us boys as well as for the bugs."

So they reasoned away their doubts and made their plans; and somehow,
before the little party broke up, each boy had pretty nearly succeeded
in persuading himself that he would be doing the Deacon a favor by
helping him make away with a small portion of his fruit. All the same,
Ned Rogers couldn't resist a little feeling of guilt, not unmingled with
dread, when his father said at the tea table that evening: "I wonder
what Deacon Gammon thought of that mow of early-cut timothy? He was up
to look at it this afternoon."

Nobody could tell what the Deacon thought of the hay, for nobody had
seen him. But Ned was thinking that he would give something to know just
at what time in the afternoon the Deacon came to look at that haymow.

That was what he said to his friends when they met next night all ready
for the proposed raid on the Deacon's cherries. There were not a few
blank faces in the little crowd when he told his story.

"He might have heard us if he was there when we were talking," said Ned,
beating a lively tattoo on the bottom of his basket. "I don't say he
did, but he might."

"Oh, pshaw!" exclaimed Con O'Brien. "The Deacon's deaf a little, and I
don't believe he could hear what we were a-saying. Why didn't you go
round, me boy, to the straw hape, and see if you could hear yourself
into the bar-rn?"

A shout went up at that, which, to be sure, was exactly what Con wanted,
since there is nothing better than a jolly-sounding laugh to put a boy
on good terms with himself and everybody else.

"It's all right," said he. "Come on, now, and don't you be afraid o'
nothin'."

Not a boy among them was afraid; but a good many of them couldn't keep
their hearts from fluttering in a very queer way when they came, with
their baskets and bags, to the gap in Deacon Gammon's orchard wall. The
orchard was near the house, and the cherry-trees were scattered about
among the apple-trees in a hap-hazard fashion. The house looked dark and
still.

"It's just as I told you," whispered Con O'Brien, triumphantly. "The
Deacon and his wife have gone to prayer-mating, and the coast is clear.
'Rah for we! Look at 'em, me boys!"

They did more than look at the great, delicious, clustering cherries,
hanging from boughs which bent low down with their weight. They pulled
them by handfuls, and bags and baskets were rapidly filled.

"But there don't look to be any less 'n there was when we begun," said
Con, with a merry chuckle. "Now, boys, isn't this a big help to the old
gintleman? He'd niver get away with 'em alone, sure."

There was no sound except the voices of the frogs in the marsh under the
hill while the work went briskly on. It was when the boys were nearly
ready to leave that they heard a voice in the direction of the Deacon's
domicile:

"I don't know, but I'll walk out and see."

"It's ould Mrs. Gammon herself!" sounded Con's excited whisper. "Go for
the gap, me boys, and don't spill your cherries over. Go, now!"

They were all only too ready to obey. Away they skurried, with long
leaps, like frightened rabbits, through the orchard grass to the break
in the wall. But they did not go beyond it. Up rose the Deacon on the
other side, as cool--so Jerry Barker afterward said--as a frozen
cucumber.

"Good-evening, boys," said he. He took off his hat as he spoke, and by
the light of the moon the boys could see that he was making a desperate
effort to keep his face straight. "Now I'm-- Hold on there! _Stop!_"

For Con and Ike Harris had started to run. They stopped, however. There
was nothing else to do when the Deacon spoke in that way, and they knew
it.

"Let's see," said the Deacon, reaching toward Ned Rogers's basket,
which was forthwith handed over to him with great alacrity--"let's see
how many you've got."

He examined every boy's load in turn carefully and in silence, and all
the while the boys looked into each other's faces without speaking. Oh!
if the moon would but go under a cloud!

When the Deacon had finished his inspection, he spoke again, kindly, and
with a pleasant smile:

"Now, boys, I'm much obliged to ye. I've laid out to go to town with a
load o' truck to-morrow, an' I was wonderin' how I'd get my cherries
picked. I'm reely obliged to ye, and I'll be more so if ye'll carry 'em
to the house for me."

Not a boy felt like disobeying. Not one but silently picked up his
burden of cherries and marched along before the Deacon to the house and
into the porch.

"Set 'em right down here," directed Deacon Gammon, cheerily, "an' I'll
see to 'em 'fore long. Now, boys, ye've worked consider'ble hard, an'
you want some supper. Come in an' have some cherry pie an' cheese."

Every boy's face said he would rather die, and there was a sound of
murmured negatives.

"Yes, you will," said the Deacon; "you've worked well, an' deserve your
supper. Right in to the kitchen now, right in! Mother's a-waitin' for
ye."

So she was--kind, motherly Mrs. Gammon. And there was a table loaded
with goodies waiting for them too--sandwiches, and plum-cake, and cherry
pie, and cherry tarts, and cherries--cherries everywhere.

"Good-evening," said Mrs. Gammon, beaming upon the boys.

"Take some chairs," ordered the Deacon, behind them; "and set right up
and have some cherry pie and sech."

The boys wondered whether they were awake or dreaming as they filed
shamefacedly past Mrs. Gammon, hats in hand, and took seats at the
well-spread table.

"Now help yourselves," said the Deacon's wife. And each boy in his heart
wondered if she knew, and hoped she didn't. But they helped themselves
readily enough; and at length, between the Deacon's funny stories and
the delicious cherry pie, they came as near to enjoying themselves as
was possible under the circumstances.

"You ain't eat scarcely anything," said the Deacon, when the boys
finished their meal. "Have some cherries? No cherries? Ho! ho! ho!"

"Now, father!" expostulated his wife, mildly, and then the boys _knew_
she knew.

"I don't s'pose I'd ought to," said the Deacon; and he walked to the
head of the table, and stood there looking down at his young guests with
a queer little smile. "I ain't much of a speechifier," said he, "but I
want to ask you boys a question. Which would ye rather be, when ye get
ready to take your fathers' places, honest men or rogues?"

Every boy caught his breath. The old eight-day clock in the corner
ticked painfully loud.

"The man'll be nigh about the same as the boy," went on the Deacon. "Now
which'll you be, boys, rogues or honest men?"

"Hon--honest men," cried Con O'Brien.

Later on he said he couldn't help it, with the Deacon looking at him,
and the Deacon's wife wiping her glasses in that anxious way; but he
meant it all the same. And they all followed his lead, as they ever did,
every boy.

"That's right," said Deacon Gammon--"that's just right; and we won't say
another word about it."

"No, don't," said his wife.

But, after all, it was Con O'Brien who said the right thing in the right
place, as he picked up his basket, which wasn't entirely empty, in the
porch.

"Whenever you want any help about picking your cherries, Deacon Gammon,
call on us," said he. "We'll be sure to come when you sind for us, and
we won't come before, honest Injun!"

"That's right," said the Deacon--"that's right."

Then his eyes twinkled, as the boys filed out into the night. "Edward,"
said he to Ned Rogers, "tell your father that's the best mow of timothy
I ever saw."

"It's just the way I thought," cried the boys, when they got out of the
Deacon's hearing, "just exactly."




[Illustration: AN UNWELCOME VISITOR.

"I'll 'tend to you in a moment, Mr. Hornet."]




[Illustration: A Midsummer Song.]




[Illustration: OUR POST-OFFICE BOX.]


  MIDDLETOWN, VIRGINIA.

     A very dear friend of mamma's sent YOUNG PEOPLE to me as a
     Christmas present. I enjoy the stories so much! and am now very
     much interested in "Mr. Stubbs's Brother." I think the pictures
     lovely. I am saving every number carefully. Mamma intends having
     them bound. I see the little girls have been writing about their
     pets. We have a German canary; he sings by lamp-light. His name is
     Paul Pry. I am a minister's daughter, and live in the beautiful
     Valley of Virginia. This is my first attempt at letter-writing. I
     am ten years old, and would love to see my letter in Our
     Post-office Box.

  M. BLANCHE M.

       *       *       *       *       *

  HUNTSVILLE, ALABAMA.

     I have no pets to write about, but I will tell you of my nice trip.
     I went to Nashville and Columbia to play in the Huntsville Amateur
     Opera Company. I appeared as one of the little Dragoon Guards. The
     name of the play is _Patience_. Sir. G. is the director, and my
     papa is Bunthorne. Let me thank Mr. Otis for his nice story of "Mr.
     Stubbs's Brother." I grow so impatient for the paper each week. I
     am nine years old.

  EDWIN L. W.

       *       *       *       *       *

  CARLISLE, PENNSYLVANIA.

     On the 6th of June my papa, mamma, and I went on the State Editors'
     Excursion to Washington and Mount Vernon. We arrived at Washington
     at half past one, and at the depot we were met by our friend Mr.
     Read, of the Patent-office. After resting awhile, we went around
     the city to see the sights until dinner-time, which was half past
     four. At nine o'clock that evening I went with my papa and mamma to
     the formal reception which the President gave the editors. Being a
     little girl, I felt shy, and almost slipped past him, but he said,
     "I don't want this little miss to pass me." So the secretary of the
     association took me, and told him who I was. He then shook hands
     with me very pleasantly, so I'm no more shy of the President.

     The next morning we took the steamboat _Corcoran_ to go to Mount
     Vernon. I liked the ride very much; it was very pleasant down the
     river. On entering the grounds the first thing visited was the tomb
     of Washington, and there we stood and looked and looked at the
     marble caskets that hold the bodies of George and Martha
     Washington. Mamma reached through the iron bars and got some
     pebbles that were put there for visitors to take. The next place we
     came to was the old tomb of Washington. We went down into it, and
     there we chipped some splinters off the old door frame. The mansion
     we came to next, and entered the hall, and there we saw the key of
     the Bastile (which is a very large key) in a glass case. The first
     room we entered was the state dining-room, and there a gentleman
     explained the different interesting things that were in the house.
     In this room, in a glass case, is a stone model of the Bastile. We
     then came into the east parlor; in it was what I thought was an
     old-fashioned piano, but I was told that it was a harpsichord. We
     next entered the west parlor; then the dining-room, in which was a
     large fire-place. From there we went into the kitchen, where there
     was a table spread, with old-fashioned dishes, knives, and forks.
     We then went upstairs, and entered the room where Washington died.
     The bed was very wide. We also saw the room of Martha Washington,
     and that of Eleanor Custis. Her bed was so high that she had to
     have three steps to go up to it. Lafayette's room and the
     guest-chamber were the two prettiest rooms in the house. All the
     rooms have the same furniture that they had in Washington's day. We
     went to the attic, and up into the cupola, and had a good view of
     the beautiful Potomac and the country around. A gentleman took a
     hen's egg out of a nest in the old brick barn. I gathered a bunch
     of clover heads and daisies from the yard.

     What I like best at Mount Vernon are the grounds and the
     river-bank, where I would so much enjoy running and playing. I used
     to think that Washington was a very plain man, but since I have
     been at his home I have changed my mind, and now think that he
     liked fine things too. We started back to Washington city about two
     o'clock, and reached there in time for our dinner, which we enjoyed
     very much after our day of sight-seeing.

     Next day we went into the Patent-office, the Treasury Department,
     the Smithsonian Institution, the Bureau of Engraving and Printing,
     the Agricultural Building, the Post-office, and the Capitol. All
     these buildings are very large and handsome, and contain many
     interesting and wonderful things. In the Dead-letter Office we met
     an old gentleman who was very kind to me. He said:

     "Little girl, are you a Sunday-school girl, and what school do you
     go to?"

     My answer was, "To the Second Presbyterian, of Carlisle."

     The next morning we started for home. I was glad to get there, for
     I was tired, though I enjoyed Washington very much.

  MAUD Z.

This is a very charming letter to have been written by a little
sight-seer who is not yet eight years old. The description of your
pleasant day at Mount Vernon, little Maud, will please hundreds of other
girls, and boys too, who have not yet been there, but hope some day to
go and see the place which was once the home of the Father of his
Country.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BLANCHARD, ONTARIO.

     I am the eldest of six. I was thirteen years old on Midsummer-day,
     so I thought I would write to the Post-office Box of HARPER'S YOUNG
     PEOPLE. I have taken it since March, 1882. A lady teacher from
     Chicago spent her vacation with us last summer, and while here her
     little sisters sent her several numbers of YOUNG PEOPLE. I thought
     them just splendid. After going home she sent me a number now and
     again, but I wanted one every week, so my little cousin and I
     together sent for it. I have never been out of Canada, but my
     grandpa has been twice round the world, and I listen with much
     interest when he speaks of the various countries he has visited. We
     have a pretty school, and a nice walk to it through a wood by the
     side of a creek. There are wild flowers in the bush, and you may
     think what nice bouquets we gather. We all go to school. My papa is
     a farmer, and we have lots of cattle and horses and many feathered
     fowls. I must not forget to tell you the nice little present I got
     from Chicago on my birthday. The same dear friend sent me a pretty
     needle-book made by one of the Sisters of Charity in Chicago. I
     prize it highly. They tell me Ontario is very much like the State
     of New York. Have you ever, dear Postmistress, been in Ontario?
     Everything is lovely here; all nature seems alive. I have quite a
     number of pets: three cats (Bessie, Tom Barney, and Jennie), two
     pet lambs (Jack and Tom), and a shaggy little dog named Tip, the
     best of all. I think I will now close my letter by sending kind
     wishes to you and to my little cousins over the line.

  M. BLANCHE D.

No, dear Blanche, I have never visited your pleasant home, but your
description is so vivid that I can see with my eyes shut the pretty
school-house, the walk by the creek, and the grove where the wild
flowers bloom. What a number of pets you have to care for!

       *       *       *       *       *

  MAINHOUSE, KELSO, ROXBURGHSHIRE, SCOTLAND.

     I am a little boy eight and a half years old, and I have a little
     brother nearly six. Our father and mother are in India, and we live
     with our grandpapa in the country. We have two Belgian rabbits, and
     I call mine Bunny, and John's Brownie. We have a pony named Sambo.
     There is a large retriever dog whose name is Don. We receive
     HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE every week from our uncle and aunt who live
     in America, and we like it very much. I like "The Talking Leaves."
     We have a canary, and he sings all day long. We have each a garden,
     and there are pretty flowers, and we like working in them after
     lessons are over. We do not go to school; auntie gives us our
     lessons. I write this letter myself, and John writes his name after
     mine.

  ROBERT B. P. and JOHN D. P.

Papa and mamma in India must be very much pleased with the letters they
receive from their little sons if they are written as plainly and as
well expressed as this one.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I am thirteen years old, and love HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE. We have
     great fun with a bear that lives near us; he is a young cub. We had
     a little rabbit and a pet canary, but a wicked old cat killed them
     both. I have a small but elegant stamp book, with 135 stamps in it;
     I would like offers for it. I am soon going to learn telegraphy.
     Could you tell me how all the people got their names?

  HARRY B. WILSON,
  77 Pearl St., Chelsea, Mass.

Some names were given, in the first place, because of the occupation of
the person with whom the family began. In all ages smiths have been very
useful, and society would not have known what to do without them; so it
comes to pass that a great many people bear the name of Smith. Wilson
was originally Will's son, Johnson John's son, and so on. Sometimes a
number of soldiers and retainers took the name of their chief, in the
old warlike days, when a castle was defended by a great many warriors,
and the lord of the castle in his turn protected whole villages of women
and children. Some names are in memory of places, of rivers, or
mountains where battles took place. Some are called after favorite
colors. The history of surnames is very curious, and you will be
interested if you look into it carefully.

I am glad you are about to study telegraphy.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BROOKHAVEN, MISSISSIPPI.

     I was much pleased with the letter from the little girl in Germany,
     for I want to know all about music. I am thirteen years old, and
     have been taking lessons five years. I play Jael's _Faust_,
     _Sonnambula_, _Rigoletto_, etc., and I am very anxious to go to
     Germany, the father-land of music. I am studying German and French,
     and taking lessons on the violin. My papa says I may go there some
     day if I study hard. I think our country is the grandest one on the
     globe, but still I would like to cross the ocean and study under
     such professors and composers as Joachim Raff, Frau Clara Schumann,
     and the violinist Hermann. I am sure they would inspire me to do
     more. "M. W." has certainly heard of our Edison and his wonderful
     electric light. I have been to Spanish Fort, in New Orleans, and
     seen the light; it is so brilliant that one almost imagines it is a
     smaller sun in the sky. Then, too, we have here the telephone and
     the audiphone, and these are only a few of the modern inventions.

  KATIE B. J.

You are certainly a very busy little woman, Katie. I hope your desire to
go to Germany may be gratified. But do not forget health in your wish
for improvement.

       *       *       *       *       *

  WHEELING, WEST VIRGINIA.

     I am a little girl eight years old. I have two dolls, and I love
     them very much. This is the first letter I have ever written. I
     have a canary-bird, and it is a beautiful singer. It is very tame.
     Once I was leaning over the cage, and before I noticed it birdie
     was pulling my hair. I have two sisters, Bessie and Florrie. My
     grandpa has a dog named Ben. He is very much afraid of
     fire-crackers. He spent Fourth of July behind the pantry door. We
     could not coax him out, even to feed him.

  LILLIE J. F.

No wonder the poor dog did not know what to make of such a fuss as the
fire-crackers made. Your birdie is very cunning.

       *       *       *       *       *

  COLUMBUS, OHIO.

     I am eleven years old. My uncle gave me your paper for my birthday
     present, and I think it was a nice present. I have always read the
     letters in Our Post-office Box, and I thought I would write one
     too. I notice that all the little girls tell about their pets. I
     have a little turtle for my pet. It likes to eat flies; it will
     take them in its mouth, and eat them fast. My turtle is very small.
     Mamma said that I must take it back to the river, because it might
     die. Our schools are all out now, and I passed for the C. Grammar.
     We have a great many canaries, and I have a beautiful Java finch:
     it has a bright red bill, and it says tat, tat, all the day long.
     Good-by.

  WINNIE S.

       *       *       *       *       *

  PHILADELPHIA, PENNSYLVANIA.

     I am very fond of pets, and have nine canaries, six of which I
     raised myself. Any little girl or boy may do the same, with care
     and patience. Mamma has two goldfinches. One of them she brought
     from Europe last summer. I don't like Europe as well as I do
     America. I was very homesick while I was in those countries where
     no English is spoken. I could not even find out what I wanted to
     eat by looking at the bills of fare. We are going soon to my
     grandma's beautiful country home near Niagara Falls, where I expect
     to be very happy.

  KATHARINE H.

       *       *       *       *       *

  CONWAY, MASSACHUSETTS.

     I am a little girl six years old. I live in a house where my
     great-grandpapa lived. There are high hills here, and a pretty
     little brook, and it has speckled trout in it; and we live in the
     shadow of big trees that my great-uncles planted when they were
     little boys. The birds come and sing in the trees, and little red
     squirrels chase each other through them, and bring nuts and eat
     them in the trees. My uncle says, when he was a little boy, and
     lived here, a red squirrel with a bushy white tail lived in these
     same trees, and he tried to catch it in a trap, but could not. I
     hope I will see one some time. I have two little kittens and a pet
     lamb. The lamb goes to the pasture now, but at night comes and
     bleats for us to feed him. And when it is almost dark, a
     whip-poor-will comes and sings to us. The laurel is now in bloom on
     the hills, and is both pink and white, and is very pretty. We sent
     some of it in a box to Chicago. I went a mile to school, and
     studied reading, spelling, writing, and arithmetic, but the school
     is closed now. My uncle sends me HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE. It comes on
     Tuesdays, and I like it very much. I am glad when Tuesday comes. I
     enjoy the Toby Tyler stories, and read them the first thing. I like
     to read about Jimmy Brown. He is a naughty boy but very funny. My
     mamma says I must not like the naughty boys, and I will try not to,
     but I read about them.

  FLORENCE R. H.

       *       *       *       *       *

  OXFORD, INDIANA.

     I am a little girl eleven years old. My birthday was on the 23d of
     May; I received several nice presents. I have two little brothers.
     Johnnie, the oldest, is five years, and Norman is eleven months
     old, the dearest and sweetest little baby, I think, that ever was.
     I go to school in the winter, but we do not have summer school. I
     am sorry, for I love to go to school. We have Sunday-school half a
     mile from here. I think we live in a very nice place. A small grove
     is north of the house and barn, and Big Pine Creek is on the east.
     I often go fishing. The creek has been pretty high several times
     this spring and summer, almost a quarter of a mile wide just east
     of the house. My grandma gave me a little canary. His name is
     Billy; he is a great pet, and a very sweet singer, and also a great
     fighter. He will bite our fingers, and look very savage; and when
     he sings he nearly always gets under his swing, and makes it go
     with his head, and thus keeps time with it.

  ZUA E. T.

       *       *       *       *       *

  GERMANTOWN, PENNSYLVANIA.

     I am a little girl of thirteen, and my brother and I take HARPER'S
     YOUNG PEOPLE, and have done so for nearly two years. I think "Mr.
     Stubbs's Brother" is very nice, but I think "Toby Tyler" was
     better. I am now staying at my cousin's, and we thought it would be
     very nice to write to you. I have lived in America for only six
     years, as I was born on the island of St. Thomas, in the West
     Indies, where we had no winter, and I never saw snow until I came
     here. I thought it came down in great lumps, and I was very much
     surprised to see it falling in flakes. I have a dear little sister
     six years old whose name is Annie, but we call her Pansy, Nannie,
     or any other pet name we choose. She had a kitten, which she named
     Tabby, and when we moved, papa put him in a bag and sent him to the
     other house, but the next day he ran away. I am having the volume
     of 1881 bound, so as not to lose any of the numbers.

  ELIZA M. S.

       *       *       *       *       *

A quart of pins, hair-pins, and needles was lately found in the nest of
a mouse when some workmen tore down the piazza of an old hotel in
Massachusetts. So that accounts for some of the pins which are always
disappearing. They were taken away by a foolish little mouse, and could
not have made a very soft bed for her family.

       *       *       *       *       *

LOUIE LE B.--We will lay your little friend's pretty poem aside until
cold weather comes round again. Thank you for sending it.

       *       *       *       *       *

C. Y. P. R. U.

A FEAST IN TAHITI.--We are sometimes ready to imagine that we know
better how to decorate our houses and dinner tables than the people do
who live in the far-off East. But Miss C. F. Gordon-Cumming, who was
invited to a feast in Tahiti, has given a very beautiful description of
the style of entertainment. It would be hard to find anything prettier:

     "Good Queen Pomare had lately died, and the islanders were in
     mourning for her. At the same time they were welcoming her
     successor, King Ariiane, with demonstrations of joy. He was making
     a royal progress over his domains, and stopping at Paea, he and his
     suite dined in the town-hall. Dinner was laid for three hundred
     guests. At one end was a table where the chiefs had prepared to
     entertain the royal party, and other tables had been spread by the
     families of the neighborhood for themselves and their friends. The
     building was decorated with palms and tree-ferns, and festooned all
     over with deep fringe made of hybiscus fibre dyed either yellow or
     white. There must have been miles of this fringe wreathed about the
     hall.

     "On sitting down, the table seemed to have a series of white marble
     vases arranged along the centre. On looking closely, these vases
     turned out to be lumps of the thick, fleshy stalk of the banana
     near the root. They were of the purest white. In them were stuck
     branches of the thorny wild lemon-tree, and on each thorn were
     fastened bunches of gay artificial flowers, either made of colored
     leaves, or of the silken white fibre of the arrow-root, or of
     bamboo fibre. From some of the banana vases floated silvery plumes
     of aerial film like fairy ribbons. This was the snowy reva-reva,
     extracted from young cocoa-palm leaves. The worker who produces
     this lovely gossamer keeps a split stick stuck in the ground at her
     side; into its cleft she fastens one end of each ribbon as she
     peels it. It is so very light and soft that but for this precaution
     the first faint puff of air would blow it away.

     "When the feast was at an end, the guests adorned their hats with
     these graceful plumes, and with the pretty, fanciful flowers. Then
     everybody adjourned to the grassy shore, and seated there, they
     watched the golden moon rising above the calm sea, while companies
     of glee-singers filled the air with soft, sweet music."

       *       *       *       *       *

We would call the attention of the C. Y. P. R. U. this week to the
article on "St. Elizabeth of Thuringia," by Mrs. Helen S. Conant, and to
"Sea-Anemones," by Miss Sarah Cooper. The boys will learn how to help
the ducks and fishes to an easier life in shady ponds by reading Mr.
Allan Forman's article entitled "Trapping Torups."

       *       *       *       *       *

Correct answers to puzzles have been received from Louis H. Hirsh, Max
L., Helen Gardner, Mary Smith, Leonie Foster, Arthur and Freddie, A. E.
Cressingham, Cortland F. Bishop, John P. Todd, Lina Sparks, "North
Star," Lucy Meade, Carl Buckner, William Dick, "Eureka," Carrie B.
Kunkel, Russel B. Beals, E. L. Barnes, Edgar Seeman, Bessie Hyde, Emma
Nusbaum, F. Harris, William F. Harris, Blanche Foster, Kitty C.,
E. N. H., L. R. S., Lucy A. Morse, Harry Beck, Beryl Abbott, Ethel Cox,
Florence Cox, Mamie England, Marion, Addie Goodnow, "Fidelis," L. D. and
F. G., Kate Marshall, and Charlie Lamprey.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUZZLES FROM YOUNG CONTRIBUTORS.

No. 1.

RHOMBOID.

Across.--1. A girl's name. 2. A receptacle for oil. 3. A sort of cloth.
4. A crime. 5. A Spanish title.

Down.--1. A letter. 2. To proceed. 3. To pinch. 4. A girl's name. 5.
Withers. 6. To ascend. 7. A Spanish title. 8. A negative. 9. A letter.

  EDGAR SEEMAN.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 2.

DOUBLE ACROSTIC.

1. Part of a door. 2. Not fit. 3. A sort of engraving. 4. A soft sound.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 3.

THREE ENIGMAS.

1.

  My first is in slate, but not in book.
  My second is in cry, but not in crook.
  My third is in man, but not in lady.
  My fourth is in fade, but not in die.
  My fifth is in Maggie, but not in Sadie.
  My sixth is in crow, but not in cry.
  My seventh is in crag, but not in rock.
  My eighth is in plug, but not in sock.
  My ninth is in rent, also in lease.
  My whole is a place of peace.

  S. BIRDIE DORMAN.

2.

  First is in left, but not in right.
  Second is in quarrel, but not in fight.
  Third is in whip, but not in flog.
  Fourth is in haze, but not in fog.
  Fifth is in fair, but not in just.
  Sixth is in blast, but not in gust.
  Seventh is in grieve, but not in pain.
  Eighth is in profit, but not in gain.
  Ninth is in sharp, but not in keen.
  Whole is a famous English Queen.

  EMPIRE CITY.

3.

  My first is in mica, but not in stone.
  My second is in meat, but not in bone.
  My third is in mice, but not in rats.
  My fourth is in rugs, but not in mats.
  My fifth is in might, but not in power.
  My sixth is in lilac, but not in flower.
  My seventh is in wrapped, but not in furled.
  My whole belongs to the great New World.

  R. B. BEALES.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANSWERS TO PUZZLES IN No. 140.

No. 1.

Ice-cream. Needle-work. Dough-nut. Eglantine. Pot-pourri. Elf. Nubia.
Dimples. Easy-chair. Narcotic. Caramel. Eyrie. Dogstar. Albatross.
Youth. Independence-day.

No. 2.

Croquet. Denmark. Locust. Strawberry.

No. 3.

      C           Y           S
    A H A       B O A       A P T
  C H A R M   Y O U N G   S P A I N
    A R T       A N N       T I E
      M           G           N

No. 4.

Washington.

No. 5.

  S I G N
  I L L E
  G L E E
  N E E D

No. 6.

  S E G A R
  E V E R Y
  G E L I D
  A R I S E
  R Y D E R

       *       *       *       *       *

[_For Exchanges, see 2d and 3d pages of cover._]




[Illustration: Music: HOLD UP THE RIGHT HAND!]

The words generally will indicate the suitable action. (1) Clap hands
smartly. (2) Strike right arm and elbow downwards, with fist clenched.
(3) Tap with right hand from the elbow. (4) Pull hand over hand, as on a
rope. (5) Strike with both hands from the right shoulder obliquely, as
if cutting down a tree.




[Illustration: "SUCH A LOT OF US, AND WE'RE SO CLEAN!"]




THE SPARROW AND THE BEETLE.


The sparrow and the beetle met one day in the summer, when the
strawberries and raspberries were ripe, and the kitchen-garden was full
of flourishing vegetables.

"Good-morning. You are early abroad," said the sparrow. "Pray where may
you have been?"

"I have been where I advise you to go," answered the beetle--"into the
kitchen-garden, where I found all manner of delicious leaves just suited
to my taste, and where I saw red, white, and black currants, fine
raspberries, pease, and strawberries."

"Oh!" said the sparrow, with a severe look; "then you take me to be as
great a thief as the snail and yourself. I wonder you are not ashamed of
plundering the master's garden, and injuring his plants and vegetables."

"I don't do much injury," said the beetle. "Creatures must live. I take
little."

"Perhaps not," returned the sparrow, "if there were only yourself to
consider; but just count up your children, and your grandchildren, and
your great-grandchildren, to say nothing of the innumerable beetles of
your own generation. I wonder you dare to confess your pillaging
propensities."

The beetle began to feel nervous; he looked right and left, but the
sparrow's eye was upon him.

"I must do my duty," said the sparrow, sternly. "I am here to protect my
master's plants. As it happens, I can serve him and my little ones also,
who are waiting for their breakfast."

So saying, he seized upon the hapless beetle, and put an end to him. But
as he was about to fly home, a cat, who had been watching from the
boughs of a neighboring plum-tree, appeared in sight. The sparrow
dropped his prey, and remained fascinated to the spot, his eyes fixed on
the cat, who came nearer and nearer.

"Is it for you," said she, "to deprive an innocent insect of his life,
and to accuse him of robbery, when I have seen you and the blackbirds
eating away at the cherries in this very orchard? It is of no use to
deny the fact," she added, as the sparrow feebly attempted to speak. "I
know my duty, and it is to rid my master of thieves."

So saying, she pounced upon the unfortunate sparrow, and was carrying
him home to her kitten, when the gamekeeper, who had his eye upon her on
account of the numerous hares and rabbits that she had made away with,
levelled his gun at her, and fired with such good effect that she fell
dead.

Now the moral of this tale is that those who would punish the faults of
others should be careful to see whether they themselves are blameless,
or they may find that retribution awaits them even in the moment when
they think they are going to triumph.




THE LITTLE MAID FOR ME.

BY A. L. A. SMITH.


                I know a little maiden,
                Whom I always see arrayed in
  Silks and ribbons, but she is a spoiled and petted little elf;
  For she never helps her mother, or her sister, or her brother,
  But, forgetting all around her, lives entirely for herself:
                So she simpers, and she sighs,
                And she mopes, and she cries,
  And knows not where the happy hours flee.
  Now let me tell you privately, my darling little friends,
            She's as miserable as miserable can be,
            And I fear she's not the little maid for me.

                But I know another maiden,
                Whom I've often seen arrayed in
  Silks and ribbons, but not always: she's a prudent little elf;
  And she always helps her mother, and her sister, and her brother,
  And lives for all around her, quite regardless of herself:
                So she laughs and she sings,
                And the hours on happy wings,
  Shower gladness round her pathway as they flee.
  Now need I tell you privately, my darling little friends,
            She's as happy as a little maid can be?
            This is surely just the little maid for me.




[Illustration: ONE,]

[Illustration: TWO,]

[Illustration: THREE,]

[Illustration: DOWN GOES SHE!]





End of Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, July 25, 1882, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, JULY 25, 1882 ***

***** This file should be named 58832.txt or 58832.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/8/3/58832/

Produced by Annie R. McGuire
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

